Harvard Health Publishing
HarvardHealthOnline+
Search
Customer Service
Content Licensing
About Us
Log In
Free HealthBeat Signup
Shop
Pay Subscription Bill
Common Conditions
Staying Healthy
Resources
Blog
COVID-19 Updates
RECENT ARTICLES

Trying to lose weight? Be careful not to lose muscle

Is your skin problem actually an autoimmune condition?

People with diabetes face higher risk of hearing loss

Antibiotic-free fixes for recurrent UTIs

Musculoskeletal syndrome of menopause: When menopause makes you ache all over

When can older women stop getting mammograms?

To lose weight, especially harmful belly fat, combine diet and exercise

Can men hold off on treating recurring prostate cancer?

The 7 types of rest and why we need them all

What are the early warning signs of cervical cancer?

EXERCISE & FITNESS
Two workout strategies that reduce cardiovascular disease risk
News briefs
April 1, 2024
By Heidi Godman, Managing Director
Reviewed by Anthony L. Komaroff, MD, Editor in Chief, Harvard Health Letter; Editorial Advisory Board Member, Harvard Health Publishing
SHARE
SHARE THIS PAGE TO FACEBOOK
SHARE THIS PAGE TO X
SHARE THIS PAGE VIA EMAIL
Copy this page to clipboard
PRINT THIS PAGE
Click to Print

Doing regular aerobic exercise — the kind that works your heart and lungs — is one of the best ways to reduce your risk of cardiovascular disease. Now, findings published online Jan. 17, 2024, by the European Heart Journal suggest that doing a combination of aerobics and strength training might reduce cardiovascular risk factors just as effectively. The study involved about 400 people (ages 35 to 70) classified as overweight or obese who also had high blood pressure. They were randomly assigned to one of four exercise programs: a 60-minute aerobic workout three times a week, a 60-minute strength training workout three times a week, a 60-minute combination of aerobics and strength training (30 minutes of each) three times a week, or no exercise at all. After one year, people in both the aerobics-only group and the combination exercise group (but not the strength-training-only group) had a significant reduction in a combined measure of cardiovascular risk factors, compared with people who didn't exercise. These risk factors included blood pressure, LDL (bad) cholesterol, blood sugar, and body fat. People doing the combined workouts also improved their muscle strength. What this means: it might be equally healthful to replace half of your aerobic workout with strength training, without adding additional exercise time.

Image: © kali9/Getty Images

About the Author

Heidi Godman, Managing Director

Heidi Godman directs all news gathering for Harvard Health Publishing, and also directs the curation and production of HHP's four monthly subscription publications (the Harvard Health Letter, Harvard Heart Letter, Harvard Men's Health Watch, and Harvard Women's Health … See Full Bio
View all posts by Heidi Godman
About the Reviewer

Anthony L. Komaroff, MD, Editor in Chief, Harvard Health Letter; Editorial Advisory Board Member, Harvard Health Publishing

Dr. Anthony L. Komaroff is the Steven P. SimcoxPatrick A. Clifford/James H. Higby Distinguished Professor of Medicine at Harvard Medical School, senior physician at Brigham and Women’s Hospital in Boston, and editor in chief of the … See Full Bio
View all posts by Anthony L. Komaroff, MD
SHARE
SHARE THIS PAGE TO FACEBOOK
SHARE THIS PAGE TO X
SHARE THIS PAGE VIA EMAIL
Copy this page to clipboard
PRINT THIS PAGE
Click to Print
Disclaimer:

As a service to our readers, Harvard Health Publishing provides access to our library of archived content. Please note the date of last review or update on all articles.

No content on this site, regardless of date, should ever be used as a substitute for direct medical advice from your doctor or other qualified clinician.

Related Topics

HEART HEALTH

Retina scan may provide clues to early heart disease

HEART HEALTH

What to know about heart palpitations

HEART HEALTH

New thinking on beta blocker use
HEART DISEASE

You might also be interested in…

Workout Workbook: 10 complete workouts to help you get fit and healthy

The numbers are shocking: Just two out of 10 American adults meet recommended levels of physical activity. Nearly three out of 10 Americans ages 6 and older admit they aren’t active at all, despite reams of research proving that exercise is a powerful preventive, and sometimes an antidote, for disability and illness. This Special Health Report, Workout Workbook: 10 complete workouts to help you get fit and healthy, features excellent workouts that will challenge your body and spirit in a variety of ways while warding off boredom.

READ MORE
FREE HEALTHBEAT SIGNUP

Get the latest in health news delivered to your inbox!

SIGN UP
Footer
Harvard Health Publishing
Facebook
X (formerly known as Twitter)
Linkedin
YouTube
MY ACCOUNT
Customer Service
Log in
ORDER NOW
Online Learning Courses
Digital Subscriptions
Special Health Reports
Print Subscriptions
MORE
About Us
Permissions
Content Licensing
Topics
Trademark Notice

© 2026 Harvard Health Publishing® of The President and Fellows of Harvard College

Do not sell my personal information | Privacy Policy and Terms of Use