Harvard Health Publishing
HarvardHealthOnline+
Search
Customer Service
Content Licensing
About Us
Log In
Free HealthBeat Signup
Shop
Pay Subscription Bill
Common Conditions
Staying Healthy
Resources
Blog
COVID-19 Updates
RECENT ARTICLES

Trying to lose weight? Be careful not to lose muscle

Is your skin problem actually an autoimmune condition?

People with diabetes face higher risk of hearing loss

Antibiotic-free fixes for recurrent UTIs

Musculoskeletal syndrome of menopause: When menopause makes you ache all over

When can older women stop getting mammograms?

To lose weight, especially harmful belly fat, combine diet and exercise

Can men hold off on treating recurring prostate cancer?

The 7 types of rest and why we need them all

What are the early warning signs of cervical cancer?

HEART HEALTH
How much cardio should you do?
March 21, 2020
SHARE
SHARE THIS PAGE TO FACEBOOK
SHARE THIS PAGE TO X
SHARE THIS PAGE VIA EMAIL
Copy this page to clipboard
PRINT THIS PAGE
Click to Print

The Physical Activity Guidelines issued by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services recommend at least 150 minutes per week of moderate-intensity physical activity—think of it as 30 minutes, five days a week—for all adults, even the elderly and disabled. However, you don't have to do all 30 minutes in a single daily session. In fact, the newest guidelines allow you to count all moderate intensity physical exertion throughout the day, even if it's just a few minutes at a time.

You can also reach your goal by performing chunks of exercise in 10- or 15-minute blocks throughout the day. For example, do 10 minutes before breakfast, 10 minutes during your lunch break, and another 10 minutes after dinner. Or do 15 minutes in the morning and 15 minutes in the afternoon. If you're just starting out, gradually build up to 150 minutes a week.

If you're already exercising and fit, you can cut your exercise time in half—to just 75 minutes a week—by doing vigorous exercise instead of moderate. Generally, that would amount to 25 minutes, three days a week. Or, you can perform an equivalent combination of the two intensities, with each minute of vigorous-intensity activity equivalent to two minutes of moderate-intensity activity.

If you're able to do more, that's even better. The Physical Activity Guidelines specify that you can derive more health benefits by boosting your workout time from 150 minutes a week to 300. But the most important thing is that you do something.

To learn more about the benefits of cardio exercise as well as many options for taking part in cardio, read Cardio Exercise from Harvard Medical School.

Image: © Halfpoint/GettyImages

SHARE
SHARE THIS PAGE TO FACEBOOK
SHARE THIS PAGE TO X
SHARE THIS PAGE VIA EMAIL
Copy this page to clipboard
PRINT THIS PAGE
Click to Print
Disclaimer:

As a service to our readers, Harvard Health Publishing provides access to our library of archived content. Please note the date of last review or update on all articles.

No content on this site, regardless of date, should ever be used as a substitute for direct medical advice from your doctor or other qualified clinician.

Related Topics

EXERCISE & FITNESS

The advantages of body-weight exercise

STAYING HEALTHY

Want a stronger core? Skip the sit-ups

STAYING HEALTHY

Strength training builds more than muscles
EXERCISE & FITNESS
STAYING HEALTHY
FREE HEALTHBEAT SIGNUP

Get the latest in health news delivered to your inbox!

SIGN UP
Footer
Harvard Health Publishing
Facebook
X (formerly known as Twitter)
Linkedin
YouTube
MY ACCOUNT
Customer Service
Log in
ORDER NOW
Online Learning Courses
Digital Subscriptions
Special Health Reports
Print Subscriptions
MORE
About Us
Permissions
Content Licensing
Topics
Trademark Notice

© 2026 Harvard Health Publishing® of The President and Fellows of Harvard College

Do not sell my personal information | Privacy Policy and Terms of Use

Close

Health Alerts from Harvard Medical School

And a FREE copy of the new report 25 Gut Health Hacks!

Sign up to receive HealthBeat emails from Harvard Health Publishing and get helpful tips and guidance for ways to lessen digestion problems… keep inflammation under control… learn simple exercises to improve your balance… understand your options for cataract treatment… all delivered to your email inbox FREE. PLUS, you'll get the latest news on medical advances and breakthroughs from Harvard Medical School experts, and special offers on content from Harvard Health Publishing.

I WANT TO GET HEALTHIER
This site is protected by reCAPTCHA and the Google Privacy Policy and Terms of Service apply.