Harvard Health Publishing
HarvardHealthOnline+
Search
Customer Service
Content Licensing
About Us
Log In
Free HealthBeat Signup
Shop
Pay Subscription Bill
Common Conditions
Staying Healthy
Resources
Blog
COVID-19 Updates
RECENT ARTICLES

Trying to lose weight? Be careful not to lose muscle

Is your skin problem actually an autoimmune condition?

People with diabetes face higher risk of hearing loss

Antibiotic-free fixes for recurrent UTIs

Musculoskeletal syndrome of menopause: When menopause makes you ache all over

When can older women stop getting mammograms?

To lose weight, especially harmful belly fat, combine diet and exercise

Can men hold off on treating recurring prostate cancer?

The 7 types of rest and why we need them all

What are the early warning signs of cervical cancer?

STAYING HEALTHY
Trying to lose weight? Be careful not to lose muscle
Rapid weight loss can lead to muscle loss. Here's how to prevent that.
January 8, 2026
By Matthew Solan, Former Executive Editor, Harvard Men's Health Watch
Reviewed by Caroline Apovian, MD, FACP, FTOS, DABOM, Contributor
SHARE
SHARE THIS PAGE TO FACEBOOK
SHARE THIS PAGE TO X
SHARE THIS PAGE VIA EMAIL
Copy this page to clipboard
PRINT THIS PAGE
Click to Print

The percentage of Americans classified as obese dropped from 40% to 37% over the last three years (2022 to 2025), according to a recent Gallup survey. The survey also found that obesity rates came down alongside a sharp increase in people using a class of medication called GLP-1 receptor agonists. GLP-1 drugs mimic a natural hormone called glucagon-like peptide 1, helping to regulate blood sugar, control appetite, and slow digestion.

While losing any amount of excess weight helps lower your risk for heart disease, diabetes, cancer, and other serious conditions, it has an important downside: you lose muscle in the process.

“No matter how much weight you lose, about 25% of that will be from muscle,” says Dr. Caroline M. Apovian, co-director for Weight Management and Wellness at Harvard-affiliated Brigham and Women’s Hospital. “And if you lose a lot of weight quickly, as can happen when you use GLP-1s or follow an extreme low-carb or low-calorie diet, you can lose even more muscle and at a faster rate.”

Weight loss versus fat loss

Why do you lose muscle when losing weight? Weight loss refers to a decrease in total body mass (largely in fat, muscle, and water). When most people say they want to “lose weight,” what they really mean is that they want to “lose fat.” To do this, you need to operate at a calorie deficit, which means consuming fewer calories than your body uses, exercising to expend more calories than you consume, or both.

You might also be interested in...

Harvard Health Publishing’s 6-Week Plan for Healthy Eating
This week-by-week plan, The Harvard Medical School 6-Week Plan for Healthy Eating, will help you transform your eating habits into a program of nutritious and delicious food choices that can last a lifetime. Applying the latest results from nutrition science, Harvard experts take you by the hand and guide you to create an eating plan to improve heart health, longevity, energy, and vitality.
LEARN MORE

To compensate for having fewer calories to use when it needs energy, the body first draws on stored glycogen, a carbohydrate-based energy reserve. Once glycogen is depleted, your body burns fat for energy; but you also convert muscle protein to glucose, especially as a quick backup energy source. That means loss of muscle mass.

How to minimize muscle loss

To prevent excessive muscle loss while losing weight, you need to take a three-tiered approach: perform resistance training to build muscle, consume enough protein, and slow your pace of weight loss.

Resistance training. Resistance training refers to exercises in which you work against a load, whether that’s from weights, exercise bands, or your own body weight. Regular training helps you build muscle; gradually increasing the intensity and difficulty of workouts stimulates muscle growth and makes you stronger.

Building more muscle with resistance training also helps with weight loss. Not only are you burning calories while actively using your muscles, but muscles continue to consume calories during rest and recovery.

Guidelines recommend that most people do at least two sessions of resistance training, along with 150 minutes of moderate-intensity aerobic activity, per week. Consult a personal trainer for a suitable training plan.

Smart strategies for achieving and maintaining a healthy weight

Lose Weight and Keep It Off
Successful weight loss depends largely on becoming more aware of your behaviors and starting to change them. Instead of relying on willpower, this process demands skill power. This Special Health Report, Lose Weight and Keep It Off, offers a range of solutions that have worked for many people and can be tailored to your needs.
LEARN MORE!

Increase protein. Muscles also need fuel to grow, and that’s where protein comes in. The body breaks down dietary protein into amino acids, which it uses to build muscle.

Guidelines recommend that adults consume 0.8 grams of protein per kilogram of body weight per day. However, research suggests that adults ages 65 and older who engage in resistance training require 1.2 to 1.5 grams of protein per kilogram of body weight. That’s approximately 90 to 112 grams daily for a 165-pound person.

There’s some debate about how much protein the body can use at one time. The general opinion is 20 to 40 grams, but some studies say the limit may be higher. Dr. Apovian recommends not focusing on the amount of protein per meal but rather on meeting your total daily quota. “You don’t want to eat all your protein at once, so try to spread it throughout the day and make sure you have some protein with each meal and snack.”

Gradual weight loss. When doctors first prescribe a GLP-1 agonist, the main reason they begin with a lower dose is to minimize side effects. But this also helps prevent very fast weight loss, which can accelerate burning muscle protein rather than fat. By losing weight slowly — 1 to 2 pounds weekly — you can maintain and even build muscle mass when combined with consistent resistance training and proper protein intake.

Image: © PixelsEffect/Getty Images

About the Author

Matthew Solan, Former Executive Editor, Harvard Men's Health Watch

Matthew Solan is the former executive editor of Harvard Men’s Health Watch. He previously served as executive editor for UCLA Health’s Healthy Years and as a contributor to Duke Medicine’s Health News and Weill Cornell Medical … See Full Bio
View all posts by Matthew Solan
About the Reviewer

Caroline Apovian, MD, FACP, FTOS, DABOM, Contributor

Dr. Caroline M. Apovian is co-director of the Center for Weight Management and Wellness in the Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes, and Hypertension at Brigham and Women’s Hospital in Boston, and a member of the faculty at … See Full Bio
View all posts by Caroline Apovian, MD, FACP, FTOS, DABOM
SHARE
SHARE THIS PAGE TO FACEBOOK
SHARE THIS PAGE TO X
SHARE THIS PAGE VIA EMAIL
Copy this page to clipboard
PRINT THIS PAGE
Click to Print
Disclaimer:

As a service to our readers, Harvard Health Publishing provides access to our library of archived content. Please note the date of last review or update on all articles.

No content on this site, regardless of date, should ever be used as a substitute for direct medical advice from your doctor or other qualified clinician.

Related Topics

STAYING HEALTHY

Strength training builds more than muscles

HEART HEALTH

Safe and effective high-intensity interval training

NUTRITION

Maximize your muscle defense: Protein is key to protection
BONE, JOINT & MUSCLE HEALTH
DIET & WEIGHT LOSS
MEDICATIONS
PHYSICAL ACTIVITY
FREE HEALTHBEAT SIGNUP

Get the latest in health news delivered to your inbox!

SIGN UP
Footer
Harvard Health Publishing
Facebook
X (formerly known as Twitter)
Linkedin
YouTube
MY ACCOUNT
Customer Service
Log in
ORDER NOW
Online Learning Courses
Digital Subscriptions
Special Health Reports
Print Subscriptions
MORE
About Us
Permissions
Content Licensing
Topics
Trademark Notice

© 2026 Harvard Health Publishing® of The President and Fellows of Harvard College

Do not sell my personal information | Privacy Policy and Terms of Use

Close

Health Alerts from Harvard Medical School

And a FREE copy of the new report 25 Gut Health Hacks!

Sign up to receive HealthBeat emails from Harvard Health Publishing and get helpful tips and guidance for ways to lessen digestion problems… keep inflammation under control… learn simple exercises to improve your balance… understand your options for cataract treatment… all delivered to your email inbox FREE. PLUS, you'll get the latest news on medical advances and breakthroughs from Harvard Medical School experts, and special offers on content from Harvard Health Publishing.

I WANT TO GET HEALTHIER
This site is protected by reCAPTCHA and the Google Privacy Policy and Terms of Service apply.