Skip to main content

An official website of the United States government

Here’s how you know
Search Query:
HEALTH TOPICS 
HEALTH EDUCATION 
RESEARCH 
GRANTS AND TRAINING 
NEWS AND EVENTS 
ABOUT NHLBI 
Home All News Moving more linked to reduced risks for cardiovascular disease
NHLBI IN THE PRESS
Moving more linked to reduced risks for cardiovascular disease
November 19, 2024

Regular physical activity supports a healthy heart. Researchers are also finding that adults who take steps to move more throughout the day often have better long-term health outcomes. A new study adds to this research by showing that people who sat less were less likely to develop heart failure or die from events like having a heart attack or stroke. 

To reach these findings, investigators assessed health data from more than 89,000 adults who were between ages 40-69 at the start of the analysis. During this time, the adults shared information about their regular activities. They wore a wrist-based watch that tracked how much they exercised, moved, or slept throughout a week. They also shared updates about their health for about 10 years. After reviewing these outcomes, researchers found that adults who got regular physical activity and moved more throughout the day were less likely to develop heart failure or an irregular heart rhythm, have a heart attack, or die from cardiovascular disease. The strongest connections emerged with regular physical activity and daily movement being linked to reduced risks for heart failure or from dying from cardiovascular disease. 

Therefore, the authors recommend that adults prioritize ways to stay active. This could include a range of activities, like brisk walking or bicycling, that get the heart rate up for about 20-30 minutes a day, or 150 minutes a week. In addition, they noted the importance of finding ways to break up long periods of sitting or lying down. This might include taking short walking breaks or doing light chores. The study was supported by NHLBI and the findings were published in the Journal of the American College of Cardiology
(link is external)
. 

Media Coverage
November 19, 2024 | Vice
Don’t get too comfy: sitting too much can lead to heart disease
(link is external)
November 19, 2024 | Men's Health
Can you out-exercise your desk job? 
(link is external)
November 18, 2024 | CNN
Sitting too much linked to heart disease –– even if you work out, according to new study 
(link is external)
November 18, 2024 | Fortune
Sitting too much is a danger not even exercise can undo. Here are 5 tips to move more 
(link is external)
November 18, 2024 | The Harvard Gazette
Too much sitting hurts the heart 
(link is external)
Back To Top Link
Back to top
Web Policies & Notices
Accessibility
No FEAR Act Data
Privacy Policy
Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
HHS Vulnerability Disclosure
(link is external)
Related Government Websites
Health and Human Services
(link is external)
National Institutes of Health
Office of the Inspector General
(link is external)
USA.gov
(link is external)
Stay Connected

Live Chat 

Live Chat with us, Monday through Friday, 8:30 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. EST.

Get Email Alerts

Receive automatic alerts about NHLBI related news and highlights from across the Institute.

Footer Bottom
Contact Us Site Index Jobs
  