Locations:
Abu Dhabi|Canada|Florida|London|Nevada|Ohio
Health Library
Find a Provider
Make an Appointment
News
Careers
Contact Us
Search
October 6, 2025/Diet, Food & Fitness/Exercise & Fitness
What To Know About Exercise and Heart Rate Zones

Understanding heart rate zones can help you tailor your workout to reach your goals

How intense was the workout you just finished? To truly answer that question, it helps to know your heart rate zones. This 1 to 5 scale reflects the effort and energy that you put into an activity.

Each zone is determined by a formula connected to your heart rate during an activity and offers different benefits for your body. But fair warning: It requires a bit of math to understand how it all works.

Let’s break down the numbers with the help of exercise physiologist Christopher Travers, MS.

What are heart rate zones?

Heart rate zones are essentially an indication of how hard your heart works to pump blood and keep up with the demands of what you’re doing, says Travers. It’s also a sign of what your body is burning for fuel.

Understanding target heart rate zones and what each offers allows you to tailor workouts to hit specific fitness goals, such as:

Better cardiovascular fitness and endurance
Fat burning and weight loss
Building strength
Reducing injury risk

“Certain heart rate zones bring certain benefits,” explains Travers. “Which one you’re in during a workout says a lot about what you’re going to get out of it.”

The five heart rate zones

There are five heart rate zones, ranked 1 to 5. A higher heart rate puts you in a higher heart rate zone. That may seem simple enough. But it’s not the whole story when it comes to setting your zones.

The reason? Each zone is based on a percentage of your maximum heart rate during exercise, or the highest number of times your heart can beat in 60 seconds. This number varies from person to person based on age, fitness level and other factors, says Travers.

Here’s a basic rundown of each zone.

Zone 1: Low to moderate intensity at 50% to 60% of your max heart rate. You can easily hold a conversation. You’re typically in this zone while warming up and cooling down, or during a relatively easy workout. It’s ideal for a recovery workout, too.
Zone 2: Moderate intensity at 60% to 70% of your max heart rate. A light conversation is possible, though you might need to stop here and there to catch your breath. Target this zone for longer cardio activities to build endurance or a light workout to limit injury risk.
Zone 3: Moderate to high intensity at 70% to 80% of your max heart rate. Chatter will be at a minimum as your breathing intensifies. A workout in this zone is comfortably hard. Good for building strength and endurance.
Zone 4: High intensity at 80% to 90% of your max heart rate. Talking takes effort. You’re pushing hard and approaching a redline effort to boost speed and strength. Workouts in this zone should be limited to one or two times a week.
Zone 5: Very high intensity at 90% to 100% of your max heart rate. Gasp! You’re trying to breathe, not talk. This would be a max effort activity. These exercises strengthen your heart by forcing it to work at peak capacity while also building fast-twitch muscle fibers.

If you’re trying to lose weight, it’s best to exercise with your target heart rate in zones 1 to 3. That’s because your body burns stored fat to fuel itself while doing those lower-intensity activities, says Travers.

Higher-intensity activities in zones 4 and 5, on the other hand, use your body’s glycogen (carbohydrates) and protein reserves to power through the session.

Zone	Also known as	Intensity level	% of max heart rate	Fuel source
Zone 1	Warm-up, recovery, easy	Moderate-low	50% to 60%	Fat
Zone 2	Aerobic, endurance, base, light	Moderate	60% to 70%	Fat
Zone 3	Tempo, threshold, cardio, moderate	Moderate-high	70% to 80%	Fat, carbs and protein
Zone 4	Lactate threshold, redline, hard	High	80% to 90%	Carbs and protein
Zone 5	Anaerobic, V02 max, peak, maximum	Very high	90% to 100%	Carbs and protein
How to calculate target heart rate zones

The most basic way to estimate your max heart rate and set your heart rate zones is by using a basic age-adjusted formula. Don’t worry! It’s relatively easy math:

220 – your age = your max heart rate

So, for example, if you’re 40 years old, your max heart rate would be 180 beats per minute (BPM). (To show the math, as teachers always ask: 220 – 40 = 180.)

From there, a 40-year-old’s target heart rate for each zone follows the assigned percentages:

Zone 1: 90 to 108 BPM (50% to 60% of 180)
Zone 2: 108 to 126 BPM (60% to 70% of 180)
Zone 3: 126 to 144 BPM (70% to 80% of 180)
Zone 4: 144 to 162 BPM (80% to 90% of 180)
Zone 5: 162 to 180 BPM (90% to 100% of 180)

Of course, not all 40-year-olds — or 20-year-olds or 60-year-olds, for that matter — are at the same level of fitness. Your actual max heart rate could be higher or lower than what this formula spits out.

“Not everyone has the same heart rate max or work capacity, so err on the side of caution when trying to reach zones,” recommends Travers. “The lower zone number may actually be your max for that zone.”

Other formulas — including the more complicated heart rate reserve formula, or Karvonen method — may provide a more accurate max heart rate number. (“Using a Karvonen calculator may give you a better idea of target zones once you establish a baseline,” notes Travers.)

The most accurate way to know your max heart rate is through an exercise stress test or a VO2 max test. During the test, you’ll be monitored while running as fast as possible on a treadmill or pedaling on an exercise bike. The heart rate you achieve at your “breaking point” is your max.

How to determine your heart rate

Many smartwatches include heart rate monitors that offer instant data as you’re working out or just sitting on the couch. (That idle time rate would be your resting heart rate, by the way.)

You can also go “old school” and find your heart rate by feeling your pulse on your wrist. Count the number of pounding thump beats in 30 seconds and then double that number for your heart rate.

Final thoughts

It’s best to chat with a healthcare provider before setting up an exercise program and determining target heart rate zones, especially if you have underlying health issues. Find out what’s safest for you.

“Make sure you check with your doctor before starting any new exercise program,” advises Travers. “Don’t be worried too much about heart rate numbers right away either. Just start slow and focus on building an exercise habit.”

Learn more about our editorial process.

Advertisement

Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services. Policy

Health Library
Heart Rate
Overview
Test Details
Results and Follow-Up

Advertisement

Advertisement

Advertisement

Advertisement

Related Articles
January 16, 2026/Exercise & Fitness
Squats: How To Do Them and Why They Rock

Squats are foundational for building strength in your legs, glutes, quads and core muscles

January 9, 2026/Weight Loss
Positive Steps: How Walking Can Help You Lose Weight

A consistent walking program is an effective way to drop pounds and lose body fat

December 16, 2025/Exercise & Fitness
How To Make Periodization Training Work for You

You can improve your athletic performance over time by breaking up your workout regimen into focused cycles

November 4, 2025/Exercise & Fitness
Stretching: 9 Exercises and 8 Benefits

Shoulder rolls, hamstring stretches and calf exercises can all improve flexibility and endurance

October 13, 2025/Exercise & Fitness
Easy Does It: Why You Should Target Zone 2 Cardio Workouts

Lower-intensity workouts can deliver high-quality health and fitness results

October 7, 2025/Exercise & Fitness
Your Simple Guide to Progressive Overload Training

Incremental changes in your exercise routine can improve your strength and endurance over time

September 29, 2025/Exercise & Fitness
A How-To Guide on Muscle Hypertrophy

Increase the size of your muscles by bulking up on protein and focusing on slow, intense movements with progressive overloading

September 26, 2025/Exercise & Fitness
How To Make the Most Out of Active Recovery

Low-impact exercises help you recover faster between sets, during cool downs and on rest days

Trending Topics
Lung
Cold Weather and Asthma: Here’s How To Breathe Easier This Winter

Wearing a scarf, adjusting your outdoor activities and following your asthma treatment plan can help limit breathing problems

Exercise & Fitness
What To Eat During Marathon Training

Your diet in the weeks, days and hours ahead of your race can power you to the finish line

Sex & Relationships
How To Recognize (and Stop) a Guilt Trip

When someone guilt trips you, they’re using emotionally manipulative behavior to try to get you to act a certain way

Health Categories To Explore
Brain & Nervous System
Children's Health
Exercise & Fitness
Heart Health
Men's Health
Mental Health
Nutrition
Orthopaedics
Primary Care
Skin Care & Beauty
Wellness
Women's Health
Other Popular Categories
Aging Well
Allergies
Cancer Care & Prevention
Chronic Pain
Cold, Flu & Respiratory Illnesses
Diabetes & Endocrinology
Digestive
Ear, Nose & Throat
Eye Care
Infectious Disease
Lung
Oral Health
Parenting
Pregnancy & Childbirth
Recipes
Rheumatology & Immunology
Senior Health
Sex & Relationships
Sleep
Urinary & Kidney Health
Weight Loss
Cleveland Clinic
Home
About Cleveland Clinic
Careers at Cleveland Clinic
Giving
Community Outreach
Research & Innovations
Health Library
Free Health eNewsletters
Resources for Medical Professionals
Media Relations
Site Information & Policies
Send Us Feedback
About this Website
Advertising Policy
Social Media Policy
Copyright, Reprints & Licensing
Website Terms of Use
Website Privacy Policy
Notice of Privacy Practices
Non-Discrimination and Availability
Resources
Mobile Apps
Podcasts
9500 Euclid Avenue, Cleveland, Ohio 44195 | 800.223.2273 | © 2026 Cleveland Clinic. All Rights Reserved.