DAILY SKIMM
HEALTH
SPORTS
SHOPPING
MORE+
Skimm +
Newsletters
EXERCISES
·
3 MIN READ
Planks are Good for Your Heart, Too—Here's How to Increase Their Cardio Cred

We know they strengthen the core, but are planks cardio? Here's how to tell if you're getting heart health benefits from your plank.

fb
twitter
email
paper-clip
Photo: Getty Images/The Good Brigade
May 27, 2021
Skimm'd by Francesca Krempa (originally published by Well + Good).

Planks aren’t usually associated with heart health. This classic exercise—which involves holding yourself in a push-up position for, like, ever—is generally seen as a strength-training move for the core, back, arms, and glutes. Sure, planks are hard AF… but they’re not cardio, right?

FEATURED EXPERT(S)

Ana Snyder - Ana Snyder has an MS in exercise physiology from Cal State. She's a fitness coach, model, and entrepreneur who's written numerous articles, worked with prestigious brands, and trained several high-level executives in physical activity, nutrition, and the science of exercise.

Satjit Bhusri - Satjit Bhusri, MD, FACC, is the founder of Upper East Side Cardiology. Ivy League-educated, triple board-certified, Dr. Bhusri brings nearly 15 years of intensive study and training in medicine to his patients. He is a selected fellow of the American College of Cardiology, council member of the American Heart Association, and the former associate program director of the prestigious cardiology training fellowship at Lenox Hill Hospital.

As it turns out, planks can tune up our tickers, making them advantageous for overall body strength and endurance. Satjit Bhusri, MD, a cardiologist and founder of Upper East Side Cardiology, explains that the seemingly simple act of holding up your body weight helps strengthen your heart by diverting blood to the muscles that need the energy. The longer you hold a plank—at least 60 seconds, ideally—the harder your heart works to send your muscles the oxygenated blood they require.

If you want to know for sure whether your planks are giving you cardio benefits, turn on your fitness tracker—you’ll want to take note of your heart beats per minute (BPM) to get into your optimal heart rate zone for increasing cardiovascular health, says Dr. Bhusri.

According to the American Heart Association, your maximum heart rate is about 220 minus your age. Your target heart rate while doing moderate activities is 50-70 percent of your maximum heart rate. To crunch that number, take the first number (220 minus your age) and multiply it by the percentage. So, if you’re 30 years old, your target heart rate at 55 percent should land at about 101 BPM—that’s where you’ll see the best cardiovascular results while doing a plank. (If all that math is too complicated, check out this handy chart by the AHA.)

If your heart rate in plank isn’t as high as you want it, consider adding some simple movement to your plank routine. “It’s important to remember that cardiovascular endurance and muscular endurance are two separate things,” says certified personal trainer Ana Snyder, M.S. “Stationary planks can help with cardiovascular endurance to some extent, since your heart rate will elevate, but moving planks get your heart rate up higher and are more effective for heart health.”

Need some ideas? Snyder has you covered. Below are 4 fun ways to ensure your planks are cardio friendly:
Plank jacks

Start in a high plank position on your hands and toes, with your spine aligned down to your ankles. Then,  jump your feet out and in (like you’re doing jumping jacks) while keeping your core engaged and your hips level.

Knee-to-elbows

In the same high plank position, bring your left knee in towards your left elbow, then repeat on the right side. Alternate back and forth as quickly as you can without losing form.

Plank walks

While in your plank, walk your hands and feet sideways for 10 steps. Then walk back to the other side. Repeat for 30 seconds to 1 minute.

See-Saw Planks:

Start in a low plank position on your forearms and toes, with your spine aligned down to your ankles. From there, squeeze your abs and use your toes to push yourself forward and then pull yourself backward in a sawing motion. Repeat the movement several times until you reach the 60-second mark (or you feel your form slipping.)

Whether it’s a stationary or moving plank, Snyder reminds you to breathe—something that’s tough to do while using all of your core muscles to hold yourself up in that plank position, but is oh-so-necessary for a heart-rate boost with benefits.

Live Smarter

Sign up for the Daily Skimm email newsletter. Delivered to your inbox every morning and prepares you for your day in minutes.

Email
Sign up
Read Next
EXERCISES
·
8 MIN READ
15 Resistance Band Exercises for Beginners That You Can Do Anytime, Anywhere
EXERCISES
·
17 MIN READ
16 Upper Glutes Exercises Personal Trainers Swear By for a Stronger Butt
EXERCISES
·
7 MIN READ
What’s the Difference Between Lagree and Pilates—and Which One Is Right for You?
EXERCISES
·
9 MIN READ
6 Moves to Help Get Rid of That Hump at the Base of Your Neck
EXERCISES
·
12 MIN READ
Ankle Weights Are the Key to Firing Up Your Abs—These Are the 8 Best Exercises to Do
EXERCISES
·
8 MIN READ
Sit All Day? The Open Book Stretch Can Give Your Stiff, Sore Back Much-Needed Relief
Trending
SELF CARE
·
10 MIN READ
These Adult-Friendly Fidget Toys Helped Me Cut Back on Doom-Scrolling
ASK AN EXPERT
·
4 MIN READ
Here’s What the Youngest Full-Time Equity Trader on Wall Street Wants You to Know About Investing
KIDS
·
7 MIN READ
Games, Toys, and Activities for Those Long Winter Days at Home
MONEY
·
4 MIN READ
Tipping Guidelines From an Etiquette Expert
NEWS
·
8 MIN READ
ReproductiveRights.Gov Vanished, So We Brought It Back
Daily Skimm
Health
Sports
Shopping
Skimm+
Newsletters
Beauty
Fitness
Fashion
Relationships
Sex
Gift Guides
Books
Travel

Follow us

fb-round
twitter-round
youtube-round
insta-round
About us
Masthead
FAQ
Press
Careers
Terms
Privacy
Accessibility Policy
Disclaimers
Advertise with us
Do Not Sell My Personal Information
Need help?

© 2012-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company. All rights reserved. theSkimm is among the federally registered trademarks of Everyday Health, Inc., and may not be used by third parties without explicit permission

This site is protected by reCAPTCHA and the Google Privacy Policy and Terms of Service apply.