Skip to main content
Live Science Plus
JOIN NOW
10
MEMBER FEATURES
24/7
ACCESS AVAILABLE
25K
ACTIVE MEMBERS
Exclusive Newsletters
Science news direct to your inbox
Member Competitions
Win exclusive prizes
Exclusive Content
Premium articles & videos
Early Access
First to see new features
Private Forums
Connect with members
Monthly Rewards
Surprise gifts & perks
GET LIVE SCIENCE PLUS
It's quick and easy to access Live Science Plus, simply enter your email below. We'll send you a confirmation and sign you up for our daily newsletter, keeping you up to date with the latest science news.
By submitting your information, you confirm you are aged 16 or over, have read our Privacy Policy and agree to the Terms & Conditions.
Sign up to our newsletter
RSS
Sign in
Search
Space
Health
Planet Earth
Animals
Archaeology
Physics & Math
Technology
More 
TRENDING
Colorado River flows 'uphill'
Ancient sea turtle stampede
'Richard's secret' medieval seal
'Time-warped' supernovas
How long does it take the sun to rotate?
Health
Tiny improvements in sleep, nutrition and exercise could significantly extend lifespan, study suggests

News
By Marianne Guenot published January 20, 2026

Combining small improvements to several areas of well-being could lead to bigger health gains than improving just one in isolation, a new study suggests.

A new study suggests that making small improvements across your sleep, diet and exercise habits could add up to significant improvements in lifespan. (Image credit: Lu ShaoJi/Getty Images)
Share this article
1
Join the conversation
Follow us
Add us as a preferred source on Google
Newsletter
Subscribe to our newsletter

Small changes in exercise, sleep and dietary habits could do wonders for people's health and possibly extend their overall lifespan, a large U.K. study suggests.

The research, published Jan. 13 in the journal eClinicalMedicine, sought to find the smallest possible lifestyle improvements that could measurably lengthen people's lifespans. The researchers searched within data collected from almost 60,000 people in the UK Biobank cohort, a repository of medical and lifestyle data from hundreds of thousands of U.K. adults.

The team linked the participants' documented habits to their theoretical overall longevity and health, as calculated using statistical modelling. They found that people who slept as little as five extra minutes daily, engaged in just two extra minutes of moderate-to-vigorous physical activity per day, and added a half serving of vegetables per day tended to live significantly longer than the worst performers — meaning those whose sleep habits, exercise, and nutrition patterns put them in the bottom 5% of the overall cohort.

YOU MAY LIKE
Lifespan may be 50% heritable, study suggests
6 tips to kickstart your exercise routine and actually stick to it, according to science
Brain benefits of exercise come from the bloodstream — and they may be transferrable, mouse study finds

The former group had an extra year of overall lifespan compared with the latter, according to the statistical model.

That's not to say that adding a few minutes of exercise or sleep and making small changes to diet will guarantee an extra year of life, Stephen Burgess, a statistician at the University of Cambridge who was not involved in the study, told Live Science in an email.

"By itself, this study does not prove that these habits improve health," he cautioned. "They model what might happen to our life span if changing these factors does improve health."

Interestingly, the data suggested that improvements across several aspects of well-being are "greater than the sum of their parts," lead study author Nicholas Koemel, a dietitian and research fellow at The University of Sydney, told Live Science. For instance, to gain one additional year of lifespan through sleep alone, the study suggested a person would have to sleep an extra 25 minutes per night — a luxury many cannot afford. But very small improvements in sleep, exercise and diet may have a significant combined effect.

Sign up for the Live Science daily newsletter now

Get the world’s most fascinating discoveries delivered straight to your inbox.

Contact me with news and offers from other Future brands
Receive email from us on behalf of our trusted partners or sponsors
By submitting your information you agree to the Terms & Conditions and Privacy Policy and are aged 16 or over.

Koemel said the findings suggest that "healthy habits work better as a package."

"Each one of our behaviors has an interlinking impact on what we do," he said. "If we have a poor night's sleep, we oftentimes eat differently, we move differently. And we see that across all of these different behaviors."

Per the model, the study participants with the most optimal combination of these behaviors — at least 40 minutes of moderate-to-vigorous exercise, seven to eight hours of sleep per day, and an overall healthy diet — were predicted to live an extra nine years, overall, and live nine extra years in good health, compared with the poorest 3% of performers.

YOU MAY LIKE
Lifespan may be 50% heritable, study suggests
6 tips to kickstart your exercise routine and actually stick to it, according to science
Brain benefits of exercise come from the bloodstream — and they may be transferrable, mouse study finds

By their very design, studies like these, known as cohort studies, need to be taken with a grain of salt. They compare two groups retroactively rather than asking people to change their habits and seeing how that change affects their health. As such, they can never conclusively prove that one particular change caused an associated effect; they can only draw a link between the two.

For instance, sleep and exercise habits were measured for only up to a week in the UK Biobank cohort, and the data assume that people kept up those same habits in the long run. Similarly, diet was assessed only at the beginning of the study, rather than monitored over time. So it's possible that the participants changed their habits after these assessments were taken, which would weaken the possibility that their habits improved their lifespan.

All of this leaves room for the possibility that it was not these lifestyle differences, but rather some other factor that wasn't measured, that caused the improvement in lifespan.

RELATED STORIES

—Life expectancy is increasing at a slower rate this century

—We're nowhere near reaching the maximum human life span, controversial study suggests

—Extreme longevity: The secret to living longer may be hiding with nuns... and jellyfish

It may be, for instance, that one group is wealthier, and it so happens that this makes it easier for that group to exercise, sleep well and eat well. But ultimately, that difference is partially explained by the wealth, not only the behaviors, Burgess explained. It is also possible wealthy people might live in a less polluted area than poorer people, which could contribute to the difference in lifespan. There's no way of telling from this study alone.

"The overall message that small changes in these factors are likely to be beneficial is probably correct," Burgess said. "But whether the exact numbers are accurate or not is less clear."

Koemel agreed, saying that more research is needed to confirm the findings. Still, the idea that even tiny changes in lifestyle could have large effects could offer an interesting alternative for those looking to improve their overall well-being, he suggested.

"New Year's resolutions oftentimes fail because we're pushing too hard," he argued. "We're trying to go to the gym every day. We're trying to be perfect." This research suggests there may be a "different path to get from A to Z," by making smaller changes across several areas of well-being that can build up to healthier habits while improving overall health.

Disclaimer

This article is for informational purposes only and is not meant to offer medical advice.

Marianne Guenot
Live Science Contributor

Marianne is a freelance science journalist specializing in health, space, and tech. She particularly likes writing about obesity, neurology, and infectious diseases, but also loves digging into the business of science and tech. Marianne was previously a news editor at The Lancet and Nature Medicine and the U.K. science reporter for Business Insider. Before becoming a writer, Marianne was a scientist studying how the body fights infections from malaria parasites and gut bacteria.

READ MORE
Lifespan may be 50% heritable, study suggests
6 tips to kickstart your exercise routine and actually stick to it, according to science
Brain benefits of exercise come from the bloodstream — and they may be transferrable, mouse study finds
It matters what time of day you get cancer treatment, study suggests
Slaying 'zombie cells' in blood vessels could be key to treating diabetes, early study finds
Insomnia and anxiety come with a weaker immune system — a new study starts to unravel why
LATEST IN HEALTH
Men develop cardiovascular disease 7 years before women
Preserved hair reveals just how bad lead exposure was in the 20th century
Lifespan may be 50% heritable, study suggests
'Nose-in-a-dish' reveals why the common cold hits some people hard, while others recover easily
New triple-drug treatment stops pancreatic cancer in its tracks, a mouse study finds
South Carolina's measles outbreak nears 790 cases — making it the biggest in decades
LATEST IN NEWS
New map shows weird magnetic anomaly lurking beneath Australia's Northern Territory
'Behemoth star,' previously thought to be dying, is 'rising from the ashes' like a pheonix
'Textbooks will need to be updated': Jupiter is smaller and flatter than we thought
Asteroid 2024 YR4's collision with the moon could create a flash visible from Earth
'Nitrogen fixing' trees could help tropical forests bounce back, research suggests
Grim photo captures polar bear mom and cubs resting in mud in summer heat
LATEST ARTICLES
1
'Nitrogen fixing' trees could help tropical forests bounce back, research suggests
2
Swarovski NL Pure 8x32 binoculars review
3
Man's autopsy reveals unexpected 'boomerang-shaped' structure in his heart
4
'Textbooks will need to be updated': Jupiter is smaller and flatter than we thought
5
A deer carrying the rotting head of its vanquished foe and a playful lynx shortlisted for Wildlife Photographer of the Year Nuveen People's Choice Award

Live Science is part of Future US Inc, an international media group and leading digital publisher. Visit our corporate site.

Add as a preferred source on Google
About Us
Contact Future's experts
Terms and conditions
Privacy policy
Cookies policy
Accessibility Statement
Advertise with us
Web notifications
Careers
Editorial standards
How to pitch a story to us
Do not sell or share my personal information

© Future US, Inc. Full 7th Floor, 130 West 42nd Street, New York, NY 10036.