NEWSLETTERS
SEARCH
Health Conditions
Wellness & Self-Care
Nutrition & Fitness
News
Product Reviews
Find a Doctor
Tools & Resources
About Us
FITNESS
WORKOUTS & ACTIVITIES
Explore This Topic
Share this article
Share on Facebook
Share on X
Share on Pinterest
Copy Link
Rowing Machine Workouts: Health Benefits, How to Get Started, and How to Get Better
Adobe Stock
ByJessica Migala
Published on December 22, 2023
Medically Reviewed byJennifer Payne, MD
ON THIS PAGE
Definition
Health Benefits
For Weight Loss
How to Get Started
How to Get Better
Nutrition Tips
FAQ

Rowing machines may have previously gathered dust in the corner of the gym. But, thanks to the explosion of rowing studios and at-home rowers equipped with screens that display follow-along workouts, rowing machines are now taking center stage.

Rowing, while definitely not a new movement or even type of exercise, has become an of-the-moment workout that’s still growing in popularity, with the International Sports Sciences Association (ISSA) reporting that participation has jumped 20 percent since 2014.

But what makes rowing a workout and what benefits can you expect? Here, we take a look at what type of workout rowing is, the health perks, and how to get started.

What Is a Rowing Machine Workout?

A rowing workout machine is a piece of equipment that simulates the same movement and resistance as rowing on water, says Aisyah Rafaee, a Hydrow athlete and American Council on Exercise (ACE)–certified personal trainer based in Boston. You use the same rowing technique on an indoor rower as you would outdoors on a body of water (though the views are obviously very different).

Whether you do it indoors on a machine or outdoors in a boat, rowing is primarily a cardiovascular workout, says Victoria Rose, a clinical exercise physiologist and weight loss specialist in Toronto. “However, you are still targeting certain muscle groups and building your strength with rowing,” she says.

In particular, rowing builds strength in your legs, core, arms, and back, and which muscle groups you target depend on the phase of the rowing stroke. As you pull the handle, extend your legs, and lean back slightly, you’ll activate your biceps, abdominals, latissimus dorsi (lats, the large muscle in your back), glutes (buttocks), quads (the muscles in front of your thighs), and calves, per a past article. Then, as you reverse the movement, your triceps, trapezius (the upper-back muscles), hamstrings (the muscles in back of your thighs), and abs take over.

Rowing workouts have the added benefit of being low-impact. This means they’re gentle on your joints, which may prevent pain and injuries, notes the ISSA.

As a form of cardio, rowing counts toward the 150 minutes of moderate-intensity aerobic exercise per week recommended by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) for general health. You can also crank up the speed or resistance to turn your rowing workout into high-intensity training (the CDC says to aim for 75 minutes per week if doing vigorous-intensity aerobic activity).

How can you tell if you’re rowing at a moderate or vigorous intensity? The CDC recommends using the talk test: If you can talk but not sing while rowing, you’re working at a moderate intensity. And if you can’t say more than a few words without pausing for a breath, you’ve reached vigorous intensity.

While rowing can strengthen your muscles, it’s primarily a cardio workout. For that reason, Rose advises adding resistance training into your routine. The CDC recommends getting at least two full-body strength training sessions per week in addition to the aforementioned aerobic exercise.

Potential Health Benefits of Rowing Machine Workouts

Rowing machine workouts are health-promoting in many ways. Here are a few potential perks:

Rowing Can Improve Heart Health

Rowing may be a full-body workout, but the primary benefits are for your cardiorespiratory system (the heart, blood vessels, lungs, and airways). For example, past research found that professional rowers have stronger hearts compared with sedentary folks.

That shouldn’t come as a shock: When done regularly, moderate- and vigorous-intensity exercise like rowing improves your heart’s ability to pump blood to your lungs and throughout your body, per the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute (NHLBI). One review also notes that exercise reduces inflammation, helping lower your risk of heart disease.

Rowing Is Safe for People of Most Ages and Abilities

Rowing machine workouts have qualities that make them safe and effective for people of all ages and abilities. Rowing is gentle on the joints, offers a great workout in a short amount of time, and can be quickly learned, says Maria Brezler, an American College of Sports Medicine (ACSM)–certified personal trainer and rowing coach in Severna Park, Maryland.

“One client, who is 88 years old, just bought a rowing machine,” Brezler adds.

And because rowing machines stay in place and your feet never leave the pedals, indoor rowing can be a safe option for people with vision loss who might otherwise get hurt trying to cycle on the road or walk on the moving belt of a treadmill. Past research found that people with vision loss were able to perform five 20-minute rowing sessions per week for six weeks, thereby improving heart health and body composition.

Rowing Is Gentle on Joints

Love pickleball? Running? These cardio activities offer an effective workout but can be harsh on the lower-body joints.

Rowing, on the other hand, targets your heart and lungs like other types of cardio workouts. But because your feet never leave the pedals, it won't put as much stress on joints like the knees, says Brezler. Use rowing to build or maintain fitness while giving muscles and joints a break from high-impact exercises like running.

Is a Rowing Machine Workout Good for Weight Loss?

A rowing machine workout can be part of an effective weight loss program. According to estimates from Harvard Health, a person who weighs 155 pounds can expect to burn 252 calories from a 30-minute moderate-intensity rowing workout and 369 calories from a vigorous-intensity session of the same length.

However, what and how much you eat remains the most crucial factor for weight loss. “You can't out-train a bad diet,” Rose says.

To lose weight, you must create a calorie deficit, which means consuming fewer calories than your body burns. While you can accomplish this by eating less and burning calories through exercise, relying on exercise alone for your calorie deficit can backfire.

One issue with exercise, especially the high-intensity variety, is that it can increase hunger levels, Rose says. This may prompt you to eat more, making that calorie deficit harder to obtain.

For example, a pair of studies found that following a four- and eight-week exercise program led to a significant increase in hunger hormones and no change in body weight or body mass index (a measurement used to determine if someone is overweight) in lean, overweight, and obese women. The researchers speculate that the appetite increases may be to blame for the lack of weight loss results.

Gear: What Equipment You’ll Need for Rowing Machine Workouts

Having access to a gym with a rower simplifies matters and is a must-have for beginners. Beyond that, you don’t need much to score a good rowing workout:

Indoor Rower Many gyms have rowing machines you can use, but if you’d like to buy one for home, there are many brands and styles to choose from. Some rowers come equipped with a screen, so you can follow along with instructor-led rowing workouts at home. Prices can range from a few hundred dollars to thousands of dollars (plus monthly membership fees for virtual classes), so it’s important to look at a range of options and read the reviews on each to find one that meets your needs in function, style, and size.
Fitted Clothing Go for lightweight, fitted clothing, such as a performance top and shorts or leggings. “You don’t want to wear baggy clothing that could get caught in the slide, so tighter is better,” says Rafaee.
Athletic Shoes You don’t need specialty rowing shoes, so just wear your favorite pair of athletic shoes. “Some people do wear socks only or go barefoot, but I recommend shoes so you don’t get blisters,” says Rafaee. The only requirements for athletic shoes are that they are comfortable and can securely strap into the footrests.
How to Get Started With Rowing Machine Workouts

If you’ve never used a rowing machine before, you may be at a loss for what to do once you sit down. Here are some tips for navigating your first rowing workouts:

Learn Proper Rowing Technique

To get the most benefits from your workouts and avoid injury, it’s essential to nail proper rowing technique. Let’s break it down, step-by-step. Here are the instructions from Concept2, a company that manufactures rowing machines:

Begin in a “catch” position, with your feet securely strapped into the footrests. Grip the rower handle with hands shoulder-width apart, arms straight, upper body leaning forward from the hips, knees bent with shins vertical (or as close to vertical as is comfortable), and heels lifted (if needed).
From here, initiate the “drive,” which is the working portion of the rowing stroke. Press your feet into the footrests to push back with your legs, while pulling the handle just below your ribs in a straight line. Wait until the handle passes your knees to extend your legs and keep your shoulders low and relaxed.
End in the “finish” position. Upper body leaning back slightly, legs extended (with a slight bend in your knees), handle held lightly below your ribs, and shoulders low with wrists flat and grip relaxed.
Move into the “recovery” portion of the stroke. Extend your arms, allowing them to straighten completely before you lean forward from the hips. Once your hands have cleared your knees, allow your knees to bend as you slide the seat forward to begin your next stroke.

Your first few sessions on the rower may feel awkward as you get used to rowing movements, but don’t worry if your technique isn’t on-point at first. “It’s okay to start without perfect technique, because you can improve it along the way,” Rafaee says. Just make sure that you’re not yanking the rower handle during the “drive” portion of the stroke. Instead, focus on using power from your lower body to pull the handle just below your ribs and extend your legs.

Use Rowing Drills

Brezler recommends using rowing drills to hone your technique. For example, practice using your arms and body only: Keep your legs and back straight while you hinge forward at the hips to extend your arms and hinge back at the hips to pull the handle to your ribs. This drill helps you focus on maintaining good posture and get used to the horizontal movement required at various phases of a stroke.

Another great drill involves pausing at different portions of the stroke to check in on your form.

For example, pause for two seconds in the “finish” position and do a quick scan to ensure your upper body is leaning back slightly, your legs are extended (with a slight bend in your knees), the handle is held lightly below your ribs, and your shoulders are low with wrists flat and grip relaxed.

Pause again as you move into the “recovery” to check that your arms are extending and you’re allowing them to straighten before leaning forward from the hips.

Practice pausing at other phases of the stroke, especially portions that still feel awkward. “A lot of times, this fixes 80 percent of someone’s bad technique,” Brezler says. Positioning a mirror to the side so you can watch yourself while you row can also help you catch mistakes.

Start Short

If you’ve never used a rower, start with five minutes and incorporate that time into your workout for the day, recommends Rafaee. Then, build gradually from there, adding time as you feel comfortable. “The more consistently you do a rowing workout, the easier it gets,” Rafaee says.

Expect Some Muscle Soreness

Your back may feel a little sore at first, but don’t let that scare you away. “Typically those muscles just need time to get stronger,” Brezler says. Giving yourself more recovery days in between workouts in the beginning can help limit this soreness. Start with one rowing workout a week and increase as your body gets stronger and you become accustomed to the workout. Rest assured this soreness should disappear after a couple of weeks, Brezler says.

Soreness-related pain typically feels achy. If you notice any sharp pains during or after rowing, you may be injured or at risk for injury. Stop your rowing workouts and contact your doctor.

How to Make a Rowing Machine Workout Harder

Ready for more? If you want a greater challenge, here’s what you can do to boost the burn on a rowing machine:

Go longer. Did you start with five-minute rows? Try rowing for 10 minutes, then 15 minutes, and so on. Ramp up your workout duration over several weeks to prevent injury and avoid overwhelming your muscles, ligaments, tendons, and joints.
Crank up the intensity. You can control the intensity of a rowing workout by the effort you put in. “The energy and effort you put into each stroke guides the difficulty,” says Rafaee. For greater intensity, row at a faster pace or put more force into pushing off the pedals with your legs.
Make it a circuit. Incorporate rowing intervals into a circuit strength routine. Row for a time and then hop off to work your muscles and cardiorespiratory system with other exercises. “You can add more intensity with short bursts of exercises like squats and lunges, with and without weights,” says Rafaee. 
Nutrition Tips for Rowing Machine Workouts

One of the biggest things that rowers need to keep in mind when fueling for a rowing workout is that you’ll be somewhat hunched at certain phases of the rowing stroke, says Leslie Bonci, RD, CSSD, a board-certified specialist in sports dietetics, recreational rower, and owner of Active Eating Advice based in Pittsburgh. For that reason, don’t row with a stomach full of food or fluid or you may experience gastrointestinal (GI) issues, such as abdominal discomfort or acid reflux (when stomach acids travel into your esophagus).

If your rowing workout is 20 to 30 minutes long, fluid is typically all you need. Bonci recommends hydrating with about 20 ounces of fluid an hour before you plan to row, so the fluids have time to leave your stomach by the time you sit down.

Water, an electrolyte-enhanced beverage, or a low-calorie sports drink can do the trick, Bonci says. Avoid carbonated beverages, which can create gas bubbles that make rowing uncomfortable, she adds. If you’re rowing for a longer duration, replenish fluids by taking drink breaks during the workout.

If your rowing session is coming at the end of the day and you’re hungry, eating part of a banana or a small yogurt can give you energizing carbs without overloading the stomach, Bonci says.

For shorter rowing workouts, eat a regularly scheduled meal about an hour after a rowing workout. This way, you can replenish glycogen (carbs your muscles use for fuel during exercise) and provide muscles with protein for repair without overloading calories by eating additional pre- and post-workout snacks, says Bonci.

Resources We Love: Rowing Machine Workouts
Blogs

Hydrow

Hydrow is a company that sells indoor rowers and offers membership-only rowing and fitness classes. On their blog, you’ll find plenty of rowing-related articles covering everything from what to expect in a beginner rowing workout to how runners can use rowing to improve their performance. 

Row House

Row House is a franchise of indoor rowing gyms that offer various rowing workouts. They also have a robust blog with rowing form tips, benefits to expect, and how to get started with rowing. 

Book

Indoor Rowing — Learn To Row Fundamentals

Written by indoor rowing coach Neil Bergenroth, this ebook is perfect for those serious about getting into the sport. This book covers all the basics of rowing, helping you with proper set-up, posture, and technique and providing tips for boosting power.

Summary
An indoor rowing workout simulates the movement and resistance of rowing on water. It’s a great cardiovascular workout that also strengthens the legs, core, arms, and back. Nailing proper technique can take time, but you can shorten your learning curve by practicing drills and seeking instruction. To lower your injury risk, start with shorter rowing workouts, give yourself plenty of rest days, and adjust your pace and resistance as needed.
FAQ
Is a rowing machine a good workout?
Yes, a rowing machine provides an effective cardiovascular workout. It also strengthens your leg, core, arm, and back muscles without putting a lot of stress on joints.
Can you lose fat on a rowing machine?
A rowing workout may help with weight loss by causing you to burn more calories: A 30-minute moderate-intensity rowing machine workout burns an estimated 252 calories for a person who weighs 155 pounds, or 369 calories if performed at a vigorous intensity. However, diet also plays a role in fat loss.
Can you get in shape by just rowing?
Rowing is an excellent cardiovascular activity that also strengthens your legs, core, arms, and back. However, experts also advise incorporating strength training into your routine at least twice a week.
How long should you do a rowing workout?
Your personal goals and level of experience with exercise in general and rowing in particular will dictate how long your rowing workout should last. Beginners should start with five minutes and build from there. Those who are more experienced can try a 30- to 45-minute rowing session.
MEET OUR EXPERTS
See Our Editorial Policy
Meet Our Health Expert Network
Jennifer Payne, MD
Medical Reviewer
Castle Connolly Top Doctor

Jennifer Payne, MD, is a physician at Penn Medicine Lancaster General Health.

She earned her bachelor's from the University of St. Thomas, majoring in biochemistry and minoring in theology. She was the first service learning assistant for the service learning program and did extensive volunteer work with Open Arms of Minnesota during this time, including building a library on multiple sclerosis information. She obtained her MD from the Georgetown University School of Medicine, where she was part of the first class to run the Hoya Clinic for people without housing. She also completed an elective in medical writing and editing, working with American Family Physician magazine. Dr. Payne completed her residency in family medicine at Lancaster General Hospital and a primary care sports medicine fellowship at Wellspan Health in York, Pennsylvania. 

She has served on the board of the Mid-Atlantic Regional Chapter of the American College of Sports Medicine and assisted in obtaining speakers and clinical case studies for the physician portion of the conference.


She enjoys reading, all sports (particularly Olympic weightlifting), walking her dog, and spending time with her husband, sons, and their extended family.

See full bio
Jessica Migala
Author

Jessica Migala is a freelance writer with over 15 years of experience, specializing in health, nutrition, fitness, and beauty. She has written extensively about vision care, diabetes, dermatology, gastrointestinal health, cardiovascular health, cancer, pregnancy, and gynecology. She was previously an assistant editor at Prevention where she wrote monthly science-based beauty news items and feature stories.


She has contributed to more than 40 print and digital publications, including Cosmopolitan, O:The Oprah Magazine, Real Simple, Woman’s Day, Women’s Health, Fitness, Family Circle, Health, Prevention, Self, VICE, and more. Migala lives in the Chicago suburbs with her husband, two young boys, rescue beagle, and 15 fish. When not reporting, she likes running, bike rides, and a glass of wine (in moderation, of course).


See full bio
EDITORIAL SOURCES
Everyday Health follows strict sourcing guidelines to ensure the accuracy of its content, outlined in our editorial policy. We use only trustworthy sources, including peer-reviewed studies, board-certified medical experts, patients with lived experience, and information from top institutions.
Sources
Sign up for our Healthy Living Newsletter!
Enter your email
Subscribe
By subscribing you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.
RELATED ARTICLES
See all in Workouts & Activities
How Many Calories Can You Burn Climbing Stairs?
WORKOUTS & ACTIVITIES
How Many Calories Can You Burn Climbing Stairs?
Medically Reviewed by Aubrey Bailey, PT, DPT, CF-L1 | Jan 20, 2026
8 Gym Machines to Use for Stronger Abs
WORKOUTS & ACTIVITIES
8 Gym Machines to Use for Stronger Abs
Medically Reviewed by Kara Andrew, RDN, LDN | Nov 11, 2025
7 Low-Impact Strength Exercises to Help Women Over 50 Stay Fit
WORKOUTS & ACTIVITIES
7 Low-Impact Strength Exercises to Help Women Over 50 Stay Fit
Medically Reviewed by Tara Collingwood, RDN | Nov 06, 2025
Build a Full-Body TRX Workout With These 16 Exercises
WORKOUTS & ACTIVITIES
Build a Full-Body TRX Workout With These 16 Exercises
Medically Reviewed by Tara Collingwood, RDN | Sep 19, 2025
This 20-Minute Rowing Workout for Older Adults Can Build Muscle and Boost Heart Health
WORKOUTS & ACTIVITIES
This 20-Minute Rowing Workout for Older Adults Can Build Muscle and Boost Heart Health
Medically Reviewed by Reyna Franco, RDN | Aug 12, 2025
The Only 7 Dumbbell Exercises You Need for Better Posture
WORKOUTS & ACTIVITIES
The Only 7 Dumbbell Exercises You Need for Better Posture
Medically Reviewed by Scott Haak, PT, DPT, MTC, CSCS | Aug 12, 2025
The Ultimate Guide to Strength Training Over 50
WORKOUTS & ACTIVITIES
The Ultimate Guide to Strength Training Over 50
Medically Reviewed by Natalie Sampson, PT, DPT | Aug 12, 2025
Water Aerobics: Health Effects and Exercises
WORKOUTS & ACTIVITIES
Water Aerobics: Health Effects and Exercises
Medically Reviewed by Kara Andrew, RDN, LDN | Aug 07, 2025
The Best and Worst Gym Machines, According to Trainers
WORKOUTS & ACTIVITIES
The Best and Worst Gym Machines, According to Trainers
Medically Reviewed by Sylvia E. Klinger, DBA, MS, RD, CPT | Aug 07, 2025
The Best Water Aerobics Workouts and Exercises
WORKOUTS & ACTIVITIES
The Best Water Aerobics Workouts and Exercises
Medically Reviewed by KJ Kroetch, CPT | Aug 07, 2025
Cardio Exercises With a Pulled Hamstring
WORKOUTS & ACTIVITIES
Cardio Exercises With a Pulled Hamstring
Medically Reviewed by Kara Andrew, RDN, LDN | Jul 31, 2025
Ankle-Friendly Cardio
WORKOUTS & ACTIVITIES
Ankle-Friendly Cardio
Medically Reviewed by Sylvia E. Klinger, DBA, MS, RD, CPT | Jul 31, 2025
Arm Bike Benefits
WORKOUTS & ACTIVITIES
Arm Bike Benefits
Medically Reviewed by Kara Andrew, RDN, LDN | Jul 31, 2025
10 Benefits of Water Aerobics (and 3 Drawbacks)
WORKOUTS & ACTIVITIES
10 Benefits of Water Aerobics (and 3 Drawbacks)
Medically Reviewed by Reyna Franco, RDN | Jul 31, 2025
How to Create an Effective Workout Split Schedule
WORKOUTS & ACTIVITIES
How to Create an Effective Workout Split Schedule
Medically Reviewed by Kara Andrew, RDN, LDN | Jun 05, 2024
A 7-Minute Core Workout for Absolute Beginners
WORKOUTS & ACTIVITIES
A 7-Minute Core Workout for Absolute Beginners
Medically Reviewed by Reyna Franco, RDN | May 08, 2024
How Indoor Rowing Helped Me Maintain a 75-Pound Weight Loss and Gain Confidence
WORKOUTS & ACTIVITIES
How Indoor Rowing Helped Me Maintain a 75-Pound Weight Loss and Gain Confidence
Medically Reviewed by Reyna Franco, RDN | Jan 22, 2024
A 30 (ish)-Minute, Low-Impact, Cardio Pool Workout
WORKOUTS & ACTIVITIES
A 30 (ish)-Minute, Low-Impact, Cardio Pool Workout
Medically Reviewed by Reyna Franco, RDN | Jul 28, 2023
Low-Impact Workouts: Health Benefits, How to Get Started, and How to Get Better
WORKOUTS & ACTIVITIES
Low-Impact Workouts: Health Benefits, How to Get Started, and How to Get Better
Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Payne, MD | Jul 27, 2023
The Best Body-Weight Exercises for Working Out Every Part of Your Body
WORKOUTS & ACTIVITIES
The Best Body-Weight Exercises for Working Out Every Part of Your Body
Medically Reviewed by Reyna Franco, RDN | Jul 10, 2023
Wellness inspired. Wellness enabled.
Facebook
X
Instagram
Pinterest
Youtube
TikTok
A PROPERTY OF
EHGLogo
About Us
Privacy Policy
Editorial Policy
Terms of Use
Meet Our Health Expert Network
Consumer Health Data Privacy Policy
Careers
Accessibility Statement
Do Not Sell My Personal Information
Contact Us
Press Center
All Health Topics
Popular Topics
Drugs & Supplements
AdChoices
NEWSLETTERS
Get the best in health and wellness
Enter your email
Subscribe
By subscribing you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.
© 1996-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company. All rights reserved. Everyday Health is among the federally registered trademarks of Everyday Health, Inc. and may not be used by third parties without explicit permission.
All information on the Everyday Health website is for informational purposes only, and is not intended to be used for medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment. For more details, see Everyday Health's Terms of Use.
Badges