Harvard Health Publishing
HarvardHealthOnline+
Search
Customer Service
Content Licensing
About Us
Log In
Free HealthBeat Signup
Shop
Pay Subscription Bill
Common Conditions
Staying Healthy
Resources
Blog
COVID-19 Updates
RECENT ARTICLES

Trying to lose weight? Be careful not to lose muscle

Is your skin problem actually an autoimmune condition?

People with diabetes face higher risk of hearing loss

Antibiotic-free fixes for recurrent UTIs

Musculoskeletal syndrome of menopause: When menopause makes you ache all over

When can older women stop getting mammograms?

To lose weight, especially harmful belly fat, combine diet and exercise

Can men hold off on treating recurring prostate cancer?

The 7 types of rest and why we need them all

What are the early warning signs of cervical cancer?

HEART HEALTH
The many ways exercise helps your heart
Physical activity triggers changes in your blood vessels, muscles, metabolism, and brain — all of which promote better heart health.
January 1, 2023
By Julie Corliss, Executive Editor, Harvard Heart Letter
Reviewed by Deepak L. Bhatt, M.D., M.P.H, Former Editor in Chief, Harvard Heart Letter
SHARE
SHARE THIS PAGE TO FACEBOOK
SHARE THIS PAGE TO X
SHARE THIS PAGE VIA EMAIL
Copy this page to clipboard
PRINT THIS PAGE
Click to Print

If you take a brisk walk, you'll notice certain changes in your body right away. Your heart beats a little faster, your breathing rate increases, and you may feel your leg muscles working. But you might not appreciate the myriad other physiological changes happening inside your body when you exercise — some of which offer benefits similar to those from common medications.

Together, exercise-induced changes can prevent or improve all the major risk factors that contribute to heart disease, including high blood pressure, diabetes, obesity, and unhealthy cholesterol levels. "Exercise can also improve mental health problems like depression and stress, which are common but often ignored contributors to cardiovascular problems," says cardiologist Dr. Aaron Baggish, a professor at the University of Lausanne in Switzerland and founder of the Cardiovascular Performance Program at Harvard-affiliated Massachusetts General Hospital.

Being physically active also helps people live longer, mainly because regular exercise helps prevent early death from heart disease, as noted in an article published Sept. 13, 2022, in the Journal of the American College of Cardiology that details the cardioprotective effects of exercise. Here's a closer look at how exercise affects the body and brain and how these adaptations protect your heart. For examples of aerobic exercise and muscle-strengthening exercises, see "Exercise recommendations and examples."

Exercise recommendations and examples

Every week, strive for at least 150 minutes of moderate-intensity activity or at least 75 minutes of vigorous-intensity activity (or an equal combination of the two). Include muscle-strengthening activities at least two days per week. While the exercise guidelines don't include a suggested time or amount to do at any one time, experts says even a 10- to 15-minute session can be effective.




Moderate-intensity exercise

	

Vigorous-intensity exercise




Walking, level surface, 2.5–4.5 mph

	

Walking, level surface, 4.5 mph or faster, or walking briskly uphill




Hiking

	

Jogging or running




Bicycling, level terrain, 5–10 mph

	

Bicycling, 10 mph or faster, or up hills




Stationary bike (indoor), moderate pace

	

Spinning class (indoor cycling)




Tennis, doubles

	

Tennis, singles




Swimming, recreational

	

Swimming, steady laps




Muscle-building exercise (also called strength, weight, or resistance training)



Weight training using dumbbells, medicine balls, kettlebells, weighted ropes, or specialized machines at home or in gyms and fitness centers
Exercises with resistance bands
Body-weight exercises (such as push-ups, sit-ups, and squats)
Heavy gardening or yard work (such as digging and shoveling)
Certain forms of yoga (such as Ashtanga, Vinyasa, and Iyengar)
A stronger heart

Over time, exercise increases the size of the heart's chambers and also conditions the heart. As a result, the heart relaxes more easily and pumps more efficiently because it requires less effort to send blood throughout the body.

Better blood vessels

High blood pressure results from stiff, inflexible arteries. Exercise boosts the amount of blood circulating through your body by up to 25%, which, over time, encourages blood vessels to expand slightly and become more flexible. Exercise also spurs the production of nitric oxide, a molecule that relaxes and widens blood vessels.

You might also be interested in...

Starting to Exercise
What can improve your mood, boost your ability to fend off infection, and lower your risk for heart disease, diabetes, high blood pressure, and colon cancer? The answer is regular exercise. It may seem too good to be true, but it's not. Hundreds of studies demonstrate that exercise helps you feel better and live longer. Starting to Exercise answers many important questions about physical activity. It will also help guide you through starting and maintaining an exercise program that suits your abilities and lifestyle.
LEARN MORE

Both aerobic and muscle-building exercises can lower blood pressure slightly in people with normal blood pressure. If you have high blood pressure (defined as 130/80 mm Hg or higher), the average reductions are greater — between 5 and 7 points in systolic pressure (the first number in the reading). "That's similar to the reduction people experience from taking a blood pressure drug," says Dr. Baggish.

Muscles: The sweet spot?

During a workout, muscles churn out a protein called GLUT-4, which improves the body's ability to process glucose (sugar) for energy, in part by making cells more sensitive to insulin, the hormone that enables cells to absorb glucose. That's why exercise helps prevent and treat type 2 diabetes. "If everyone exercised enough, there would be almost no type 2 diabetes, which is largely a function of a sedentary lifestyle typical in Western countries," says Dr. Baggish. Type 2 diabetes — which is closely linked to excess weight — doesn't exist in primitive societies, where physical activity is a way of life, he adds.

Either type of exercise can lower your HbA1c by 0.7 percentage points, which is similar to the reduction from some diabetes drugs. (HbA1c is an average measure of your blood sugar over the past three months; a normal level is less than 5.7%, and levels of 6.5% or higher signal diabetes.)

Metabolism makeover

Although exercise is widely touted for helping people burn calories and shed pounds, the amount of weight loss from exercise usually isn't dramatic unless routine exercise is coupled with a healthy, balanced, calorie-restricted diet. However, exercise does help reduce visceral fat — the type that accumulates around the liver and other organs and is strongly linked to a higher risk of heart disease. Exercise has also been shown to modestly lower triglycerides (the most common type of fat in the bloodstream) and harmful LDL cholesterol.

Brain benefits

Regular exercise is believed to help dampen the body's "fight or flight" response, which plays a role in chronic stress and anxiety. Exercise may also release naturally occurring cannabis- like chemicals that may boost your sense of well-being. In addition, Dr. Baggish and colleagues recently showed that a single, 30-minute bout of moderate exercise releases a number of proteins into the bloodstream, including brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF). BDNF has direct effects on brain function, especially with respect to mood and thinking ability. All of these effects may explain why regular aerobic exercise is as effective as any antidepressant medication, he says.

You might also be interested in...

Workout Workbook
The numbers are shocking. Just three out of 10 American adults are active enough to stay healthy and fit, and nearly four out of 10 admit they aren’t active at all, despite reams of research proving that exercise is a powerful preventive, and sometimes an antidote, for disability and illness. Which side of this divide are you standing on — and why? Maybe you’re not sure what blend of exercise is best. Or perhaps you know exactly what you need to do, but your workouts have become so humdrum that it’s harder than ever to dig up the energy to do them. Do you want to jump-start your sputtering exercise program? Or are you stuck on a plateau and wishing you could kick it up to the next level?
LEARN MORE

And while the heart may reap the bulk of exercise's many benefits, it may be the effect on your brain that inspires you to start moving more. "You can't feel your nitric oxide level rise or your blood pressure drop. But you can feel the emotional benefits of exercise right away," says Dr. Baggish.

Image: © Ariel Skelley/Getty Images

About the Author

Julie Corliss, Executive Editor, Harvard Heart Letter

Julie Corliss has been the executive editor of the Harvard Heart Letter since 2013. She also writes for the Harvard Health Letter, Harvard Women’s Health Watch, and Harvard Men’s Health Watch, as well as for Harvard … See Full Bio
View all posts by Julie Corliss
About the Reviewer

Deepak L. Bhatt, M.D., M.P.H, Former Editor in Chief, Harvard Heart Letter

Dr. Deepak Bhatt is a cardiologist and lecturer at Harvard Medical School. He is now director of Mount Sinai Heart at the Icahn School of Medicine in New York City. Dr. Bhatt formerly served as the … See Full Bio
View all posts by Deepak L. Bhatt, M.D., M.P.H
SHARE
SHARE THIS PAGE TO FACEBOOK
SHARE THIS PAGE TO X
SHARE THIS PAGE VIA EMAIL
Copy this page to clipboard
PRINT THIS PAGE
Click to Print
Disclaimer:

As a service to our readers, Harvard Health Publishing provides access to our library of archived content. Please note the date of last review or update on all articles.

No content on this site, regardless of date, should ever be used as a substitute for direct medical advice from your doctor or other qualified clinician.

Related Topics

STAYING HEALTHY

Strength training builds more than muscles

HEART HEALTH

Safe and effective high-intensity interval training

EXERCISE & FITNESS

Foam rollers: Inexpensive tools with premium payoffs
BONE, JOINT & MUSCLE HEALTH
BRAIN AND COGNITIVE HEALTH
EXERCISE & FITNESS
PHYSICAL ACTIVITY

You might also be interested in…

Workout Workbook: 10 complete workouts to help you get fit and healthy

The numbers are shocking: Just two out of 10 American adults meet recommended levels of physical activity. Nearly three out of 10 Americans ages 6 and older admit they aren’t active at all, despite reams of research proving that exercise is a powerful preventive, and sometimes an antidote, for disability and illness. This Special Health Report, Workout Workbook: 10 complete workouts to help you get fit and healthy, features excellent workouts that will challenge your body and spirit in a variety of ways while warding off boredom.

READ MORE
FREE HEALTHBEAT SIGNUP

Get the latest in health news delivered to your inbox!

SIGN UP
Footer
Harvard Health Publishing
Facebook
X (formerly known as Twitter)
Linkedin
YouTube
MY ACCOUNT
Customer Service
Log in
ORDER NOW
Online Learning Courses
Digital Subscriptions
Special Health Reports
Print Subscriptions
MORE
About Us
Permissions
Content Licensing
Topics
Trademark Notice

© 2026 Harvard Health Publishing® of The President and Fellows of Harvard College

Do not sell my personal information | Privacy Policy and Terms of Use