Harvard Health Publishing
HarvardHealthOnline+
Search
Customer Service
Content Licensing
About Us
Log In
Free HealthBeat Signup
Shop
Pay Subscription Bill
Common Conditions
Staying Healthy
Resources
Blog
COVID-19 Updates
RECENT ARTICLES

Trying to lose weight? Be careful not to lose muscle

Is your skin problem actually an autoimmune condition?

People with diabetes face higher risk of hearing loss

Antibiotic-free fixes for recurrent UTIs

Musculoskeletal syndrome of menopause: When menopause makes you ache all over

When can older women stop getting mammograms?

To lose weight, especially harmful belly fat, combine diet and exercise

Can men hold off on treating recurring prostate cancer?

The 7 types of rest and why we need them all

What are the early warning signs of cervical cancer?

HEART HEALTH
"Weekend warriors" can lower cardiovascular risks, too
Research we're watching
December 1, 2023
By Maureen Salamon, Executive Editor, Harvard Women's Health Watch
Reviewed by Toni Golen, MD, Editor in Chief, Harvard Women's Health Watch; Editorial Advisory Board Member, Harvard Health Publishing; Contributor
SHARE
SHARE THIS PAGE TO FACEBOOK
SHARE THIS PAGE TO X
SHARE THIS PAGE VIA EMAIL
Copy this page to clipboard
PRINT THIS PAGE
Click to Print

Even "weekend warriors" can lower their cardiovascular risks with concentrated workouts only one or two days a week, a new analysis suggests.

The Harvard-led study, published online July 18, 2023, by JAMA, analyzed data from nearly 90,000 adults (average age 62, 56% women) who wore accelerometers on their wrists for one week to track physical activity. Researchers compared three patterns of moderate-to-vigorous exercise among the participants: 42% exercised in a "weekend warrior" pattern, concentrating at least 2.5 hours of activity into one or two days; about one-quarter spread their exercise over all seven days; and one-third were considered inactive, exercising less than 2.5 hours during the week. Compared with the inactive participants, both of the other groups had similar, and significantly lower, rates of cardiovascular problems such as atrial fibrillation, heart attack, stroke, and heart failure over the following six years.

Current guidelines recommend at least 150 minutes of moderate-to-vigorous physical activity weekly to promote health. In light of the findings, study authors said, the amount of movement people get matters more than the pattern in which they exercise.

Image: © Courtney Hale/Getty Images

About the Author

Maureen Salamon, Executive Editor, Harvard Women's Health Watch

Maureen Salamon is the executive editor of Harvard Women’s Health Watch. She also writes for the Harvard Health Letter, Harvard Heart Letter, and Harvard Men’s Health Watch, as well as for Harvard Health Publishing’s flagship website. … See Full Bio
View all posts by Maureen Salamon
About the Reviewer

Toni Golen, MD, Editor in Chief, Harvard Women's Health Watch; Editorial Advisory Board Member, Harvard Health Publishing; Contributor

Dr. Toni Golen is a physician specializing in obstetrics and gynecology, practicing in Boston. Dr. Golen completed her residency training at George Washington University Medical Center in 1995, and is an associate professor at Harvard Medical … See Full Bio
View all posts by Toni Golen, MD
SHARE
SHARE THIS PAGE TO FACEBOOK
SHARE THIS PAGE TO X
SHARE THIS PAGE VIA EMAIL
Copy this page to clipboard
PRINT THIS PAGE
Click to Print
Disclaimer:

As a service to our readers, Harvard Health Publishing provides access to our library of archived content. Please note the date of last review or update on all articles.

No content on this site, regardless of date, should ever be used as a substitute for direct medical advice from your doctor or other qualified clinician.

Related Topics

HEART HEALTH

Retina scan may provide clues to early heart disease

HEART HEALTH

New thinking on beta blocker use

HEART HEALTH

What to know about heart palpitations
HEART DISEASE
PHYSICAL ACTIVITY

You might also be interested in…

Body-Weight Exercise: A fast, equipment-free way to get fit, strong, and healthy
The health and fitness experts at Harvard Medical School perfected workout routines that use your own body weight to strengthen your whole body — routines that offer a wealth of better health and more pep in your step. They’re all in the Body-Weight Exercise Special Health Report, along with step-by-step directions and how-to photos. You can do these feel-younger exercises at home and adjust them to your fitness level. And there’s positively no equipment necessary to get great results.
READ MORE
FREE HEALTHBEAT SIGNUP

Get the latest in health news delivered to your inbox!

SIGN UP
Footer
Harvard Health Publishing
Facebook
X (formerly known as Twitter)
Linkedin
YouTube
MY ACCOUNT
Customer Service
Log in
ORDER NOW
Online Learning Courses
Digital Subscriptions
Special Health Reports
Print Subscriptions
MORE
About Us
Permissions
Content Licensing
Topics
Trademark Notice

© 2026 Harvard Health Publishing® of The President and Fellows of Harvard College

Do not sell my personal information | Privacy Policy and Terms of Use