DAILY SKIMM
HEALTH
SPORTS
SHOPPING
MORE+
Skimm +
Newsletters
FITNESS
·
3 MIN READ
How Many Minutes You Need To Exercise Daily To Cut Your Risk of Mortality by 34%

If you want to add years to your life, exercise 90 minutes a day, according to this new study. The good news: Walking counts!

fb
twitter
email
paper-clip
Photo: Getty Images/ miniseries
August 31, 2022
Skimm'd by Rachel Kraus (originally published by Well + Good).

We already know exercise is positively linked to longevity, as well as how the longest-living healthy people on the planet prefer to log their physical activity minutes. But new research now tells us just how much you need to exercise everyday in order to add years to your life.

FEATURED EXPERT(S)

Catherine Sarkisian - Doctor at UCLA Health practicing Geriatric Medicine.

A study published in Circulation journal last month looked at the behavior of over 116,000 people spanning 30 years and found that exercising for the minimum physical activity guidelines recommended by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HSS)—150–300 minutes of moderate or 75–150 minutes of vigorous aerobic exercise per week—lowers your risk of all-cause mortality by 21 percent.

Furthermore, the study found that going above and beyond these minimum guidelines lowered your risk of all-cause mortality even more. People doing four times the minimum amount of moderate activity—the equivalent of 90 minutes per day—reduced their risk of all-cause mortality be an additional 13 percent, or a total of 34 percent. And they are the ones who are reaping the most benefit from exercise in this regard.

“It reinforces something that we’ve known for decades,” says Catherine Sarkisian, MD, a doctor of geriatric medicine at UCLA Health. Exercise is associated with lower mortality because it prevents many of the conditions that cause or are associated with early death, from heart disease to hypertension to depression. “If [exercise] was a pill, it would be the most popular pill in the world, because it has such broad effects across so many different conditions,” Dr. Sarkisian says.

The findings of the study are a “very large effect,” according to Dr. Sarkisian, but she also doesn’t think that they mean everyone necessarily needs to be hoofing it to the gym for that long every day. “I don’t think people should start feeling a lot of pressure on themselves to get out there and start doing 90 minutes every single day,” she says. “You don’t have to be running an eight minute mile. You can go out there and do moderately paced walking and still get a substantial benefit.”

Being more active everyday, rather than less, is already a step in the right direction. And it’s worth remembering that other daily activities are considered moderately aerobic, including riding a bike, flow yoga, or even yard or house work like pushing a lawn mower or mopping floors, according to HSS. Given how many activities count toward your total goal, 90 minutes seems more manageable, especially if you take a page out of the Blue Zones exercise book.

Live Smarter

Sign up for the Daily Skimm email newsletter. Delivered to your inbox every morning and prepares you for your day in minutes.

Email
Sign up
Read Next
FITNESS GEAR
·
5 MIN READ
Does the Elliptical 'Count' Toward Your Daily Steps? Here’s What Experts Say
EXERCISES
·
7 MIN READ
The Glute Exercise That Puts Squats and Deadlifts to Shame, According to Experts
SPORTS
·
9 MIN READ
Gold Medal Couple Tara Davis-Woodhall and Hunter Woodhall Talk Marriage, Motivation, and Their Next Chapter With Nike
EXERCISES
·
10 MIN READ
TikTok Is Raving About the 10-8-4 Stairmaster Workout—but Should You Try It?
EXERCISES
·
17 MIN READ
16 Upper Glutes Exercises Personal Trainers Swear By for a Stronger Butt
SHOES
·
11 MIN READ
Hoka Bondi 8: An Honest Review of One of the Brand’s Most Supportive Shoes
Trending
SELF CARE
·
10 MIN READ
These Adult-Friendly Fidget Toys Helped Me Cut Back on Doom-Scrolling
ASK AN EXPERT
·
4 MIN READ
Here’s What the Youngest Full-Time Equity Trader on Wall Street Wants You to Know About Investing
KIDS
·
7 MIN READ
Games, Toys, and Activities for Those Long Winter Days at Home
MONEY
·
4 MIN READ
Tipping Guidelines From an Etiquette Expert
NEWS
·
8 MIN READ
ReproductiveRights.Gov Vanished, So We Brought It Back
Daily Skimm
Health
Sports
Shopping
Skimm+
Newsletters
Beauty
Fitness
Fashion
Relationships
Sex
Gift Guides
Books
Travel

Follow us

fb-round
twitter-round
youtube-round
insta-round
About us
Masthead
FAQ
Press
Careers
Terms
Privacy
Accessibility Policy
Disclaimers
Advertise with us
Do Not Sell My Personal Information
Need help?

© 2012-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company. All rights reserved. theSkimm is among the federally registered trademarks of Everyday Health, Inc., and may not be used by third parties without explicit permission

This site is protected by reCAPTCHA and the Google Privacy Policy and Terms of Service apply.