Weight Loss
Nutrition & Diet
Recipes & Cooking
Exercise & Fitness
Lifestyle & Mindset
SEARCH
NEWSLETTER
Sign Up
EXERCISE & FITNESSWAYS TO MOVE
Is It Safe to Exceed Your Maximum Heart Rate During Exercise?

Learn how to calculate your max heart rate and determine what heart rate zone you should aim for during workouts.

By
Sara Lindberg
Expert Reviewed
by
Chung Yoon, MD
Updated on August 14, 2025
What Is Max Heart Rate?
How High Is Too High
Finding Your Target
Work with your healthcare provider to determine a safe, effective heart rate zone for you.
martin-dm/GettyImages
Exercising at your max heart rate might leave you drenched in sweat, but that doesn’t mean it’s something you should do regularly. In fact, spending too much time in the high zone could cause symptoms like dizziness, chest pain, or nausea for some people.
[1]

But how do you know if you’re pushing the upper limit? Here’s what you need to know about exercising in your heart rate zone.

What Is Max Heart Rate and How Do I Know What Mine Is?

Your maximum heart rate is the number of your heart’s beats per minute under the most amount of stress it can handle. “This is commonly calculated using the formula of 220 minus your age,” says Shephal Doshi, MD, cardiac electrophysiologist and executive director of the Heart and Vascular Institute at Providence Saint John’s Health Center in Santa Monica, California.

Dr. Doshi adds that this formula isn’t always completely accurate. Your real number might be a bit different based on a variety of factors, like individual and sex-related differences, as well as what kind of exercise you’re performing.

The American Heart Association and Doshi note that this formula, while easy to remember, also doesn’t consider critical components like:
[2]
Medical conditions that may impact your heart rate
Medications that can affect your heart rate
Your current fitness level
The most accurate way to determine your max heart rate is with a maximal exercise test, according to experts. A maximal exercise test pushes your body to its physical limit while a doctor — or sometimes an exercise physiologist — monitors your heart rate.
[3]
How High Can You Go?

If you’re an athlete or serious fitness enthusiast, you might enjoy taking your body to the brink to see how it performs. If that’s the case, your heart and lungs are likely conditioned to handle this extreme level, even if it’s just for a brief period of time.

But if you’re an average gym-goer, runner, or cyclist, you might be wondering how high is too high for you.

There’s no universal “danger zone,” according to Doshi. How high you can safely take your heart rate during exercise, he says, depends on variables like your fitness level and underlying medical conditions.

“You need to listen to and understand your body when pushing its limits,” Doshi says. He also advises looking out for specific symptoms that tend to function as signs it’s time to slow down:

Shortness of breath
Chest pain
Dizziness
Severe heart palpitations

Although you can technically go over your calculated maximal heart rate, says Doshi, it’s important to remember that this formula generalizes and doesn’t adjust based on important individual information. If you’re new to exercise or have a medical condition, talking to your doctor can help you determine a safe zone for getting started, he adds.

If you want to train at your maximal heart rate, consider consulting an exercise physiologist who can help you find your baseline max heart rate and monitor you while you exercise.

How to Find Your Target Heart Rate
Hanging out in the max zone for too long can be dangerous, so you need to find a range that’s safe, but still intense enough to give you a good workout — and that’s where your target heart rate zone comes in.
[4]
Your target heart rate zone during moderate-intensity exercise is about 50 to 70 percent of your max heart rate, according to the American Heart Association.
[2]
 If you want to work at a vigorous level, bump the range up to 70 to 85 percent of maximum.

You can also skip the math and use an online calculator to find a target heart rate for you. The American Council on Exercise has one that calculates your target heart rate range based on whether you’re at a beginner, intermediate, or advanced fitness level.

The Wrap-Up

You can estimate your max heart rate with a simple formula or get a more exact number with exercise testing. But when it comes to working out, it’s better to stay in your target heart rate zone rather than pushing through at your max. In some cases — especially if you’re taking any medications or have an underlying health condition — a visit to the doctor is important before engaging in activities that will raise your heart rate to the top of the recommended cardiovascular zone for your age.

Editorial Sources and Fact Checking
SARA LINDBERG
Sara Lindberg, B.S., M.Ed., is a freelance writer focusing on health and fitness. She holds a Bachelor’s of Science Degree in Exercise Science and a Master's Degree in Counseling. Her work is published in LIVESTRONG, Men's Health, Runner's World, Bicycling Magazine, SheKnows, Healthline, Active.com, HealthyWay, Yahoo Health, Bodybuilding.com, and many more.
CHUNG YOON, MD

Board-certified cardiologist practicing in Atlanta, Georgia

View all posts by Chung Yoon
Find the Secret Ingredient to a Healthier You
Get expert-backed tips on eating, exercising, logging, and more to support every step of your weight loss journey.
Subscribe
By subscribing you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.
The Latest inWays to Move
Ways to Move
Exercise Recommendations: What’s the Ideal Amount for You?
By Danielle Zickl
Ways to Move
Is a Heart Rate Over 200 When Exercising Unsafe?
By Kim Grundy
Ways to Move
4 Fat-Burning Elliptical Exercises to Level Up Your Cardio Routine
By Allison Forsyth
Ways to Move
6 Things to Consider When Choosing a Fitness Tracker
By Casey Clark
Ways to Move
A 2-Month Exercise Plan to Tone Your Belly, Legs, and Arms
By Christine Mugnolo
Ways to Move
Why Your Ribs Hurt After Doing Sit-Ups and What’s Normal
By Erin Yingling
See more from Ways to Move
Lose It! is mobilizing the world to achieve a healthy weight

Set Your Goals

Tell us what you want to achieve and receive personalized goals.

Track Your Food

Learn about the foods you're eating and keep your calories within your daily budget.

Lose Weight

Reach your goals and continue to set new ones for a happier, healthier you!

Start your weight loss journey
Advertisement
EXPLORE
Home
Weight Loss
Nutrition & Diet
Recipes & Cooking
Exercise & Fitness
Lifestyle & Mindset
RESOURCES
Help Center
How It Works
Premium
Share Your Story
Accessibility Statement
Do Not Sell My Personal Information
Privacy Policy
Terms of Service
Consumer Health Data Privacy Policy
COMPANY
About Us
Editorial Policy
Careers
Partners & Press
Contact Us
Help Center
GET THE APP
BECOME A MEMBER OR LOG IN
GET STARTED
FIND THE SECRET INGREDIENT TO A HEALTHIER YOU
SUBSCRIBE
By subscribing you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.
A PROPERTY OF
More From Everyday Health:
Everyday Health
Everyday Health Care
Castle Connolly Top Doctors
DailyOM
Diabetes Daily
Migraine Again
© 2008-2026 FitNow, Inc., a Ziff Davis company. Lose It! is among the federally registered trademarks of FitNow, Inc. and may not be used by third parties without explicit permission.