SKIP TO CONTENT
Health A-Z
Prevention & Treatment
Health Care
News
Tools & Resources
About Us
Search
TOP STORIES
Supplements and Heart Health Effects
Weekly Wellness Tips to Try
Combining Zinc and Vitamin A
Signs of Too Much Vitamin D
No Time for Exercise? Just a Few Minutes Daily Can Boost Your Heart Health
By Stephanie Brown Published on December 16, 2024
 Fact checked by Nick Blackmer

Nikada / Getty Images

Simple activities like climbing the stairs or playing with your dog can be really good for your heart.

Short bursts of vigorous physical activity—lasting just 1.5 to four minutes—are linked to a lower risk of cardiovascular problems, according to a new study published in the British Journal of Sports Medicine.

“Our results show that even a little bit of higher intensity activity might help improve long-term cardiovascular health,” Emmanuel Stamatakis, PhD, a professor of physical activity and population health at the University of Sydney and first author of the study, told Verywell in an email.

Most adults don’t get enough physical activity.1 One big reason? Not enough time.2

However, the new study suggests brief, high-intensity movements throughout the day can still support heart health. While this is not a “quick fix of the very complex problem of physical inactivity,” short bursts of movements may help some people develop a more consistent exercise habit over time, Stamatakis said.

Just 1.5 Minutes Can Make a Big Difference

The study found the strongest results among women: just 1.5 minutes of daily vigorous physical activity was linked to a 33% lower risk of heart attack and a 40% lower risk of heart failure.3

Stamatakis suggested that women might “exert themselves more” than men during these short bouts of exercise, which might explain why the study’s findings were less pronounced for men. Another factor may be that women, on average, engage in less physical activity than men.4

The Physical Activity Guidelines for Americans recommend that adults aim for 150 minutes of moderate-intensity or 75 minutes of vigorous-intensity activity each week, plus muscle-strengthening activities on at least two days a week. But a recent report found that only 20% of women meet these guidelines, compared to 28% of men.5

“If women are starting at a lower level of activity level, performing these small bouts of physical activity could be very beneficial,” Benjamin Gordon, PhD, an instructional assistant professor of applied physiology and kinesiology at the University of Florida who was not involved in the study, told Verywell in an email.

Previous studies have also shown that bursts of vigorous activity can boost health. A 2022 study found that getting 15 to 20 minutes of high-intensity physical activity each week—less than three minutes per day—was associated with 16% to 40% lower rates of death from all causes, from cancer, and from cardiovascular disease.6

The short bursts of activities help to break up sedentary behavior and challenge someone’s metabolism, Gordon added.


Adding ‘Incidental’ Physical Activities to Your Routine

The new study shows that the heart health benefits can come from “incidental physical activities,” which means that they can be incorporated into someone’s daily routine easily, Stamatakis said.

These “incidental” activities should increase your heart rate and leave you out of breath. Some examples include walking uphill, vigorous gardening, climbing stairs, sprints, or playing energetically with your kids or pets, he added.


In 2022, heart disease was related to one in five deaths in the United States.7 Regular exercise reduces heart disease risk by helping you maintain a healthy weight, lowering blood pressure, and strengthening the heart muscle.8

Climbing the stairs instead of taking the elevator doesn’t mean you won’t develop cardiovascular disease, but it’s a great way to start creating a more active lifestyle.

“I would say the most important thing is just break up sedentary activity and be more active throughout your day. That’s one of the biggest takeaways from the study,” Gordon said.

Many Americans drive to work, sit at a desk, and come home to relax on the couch. All of this sitting adds up to about eight hours each day.9 This type of inactive lifestyle can lead to inflammation, weight gain, poor blood circulation, and a variety of chronic diseases like type 2 diabetes, high blood pressure, depression, and stroke.10

“Any physical activity is better than no physical activity. Going out for a walk, even just getting up off the couch and going out on the porch to stand for a few minutes. You can make a drastic amount of difference with very small changes,” Gordon said.

What This Means For You

Incorporating short bursts of vigorous physical activity into your day can significantly improve your heart health. Activities like climbing stairs, playing with your pet, or walking uphill for just 1.5 to 4 minutes can lower the risk of heart problems. These movements are easy to include in daily life and can help break up long periods of sitting.

Read More: 
NEWS
 
HEALTH NEWS
10 Sources

By Stephanie Brown
Brown is a nutrition writer who received her Didactic Program in Dietetics certification from the University of Tennessee at Knoxville. Previously, she worked as a nutrition educator and culinary instructor in New York City.

See Our Editorial Process
Meet Our Medical Expert Board
Share Feedback
Related Articles
6 Essential Tips for Lowering Blood Pressure, According to New Guidelines
When Is The Best Time to Drink a Protein Shake?
7 Canned Foods That May Help Lower Cholesterol
Brown Rice Has More Arsenic Than White Rice. Is It Still a Healthy Choice?
Wegovy Now Comes in a Pill. Here’s How It Compares to the Injection
8 Ingredients to Add to Water to Boost Its Health Benefits That's Not Lemon
How Is Monkeypox Transmitted?
Banana Bread vs. Zucchini Bread: Which One Is More Nutritious?
Taking Fish Oil May Slow Down Aging—Especially If Combined With These 2 Habits
Almonds vs. Almond Milk: Which Has More Nutritional Benefits?
9 High-Protein Grains and Seeds That Support Energy and Everyday Nutrition
Do Protein Shakes Help You Lose Weight or Just Add Calories?
Is It Safe to Eat Moldy Cheese?
Foods to Eat and Avoid While on Semaglutide for Optimal Results
What Happens to Your Immune System When You Eat Kimchi
I'm a Dietitian and This Is My Favorite Way to Add Protein to a Matcha Latte
Daily Health Tips to Your Inbox

Email Address
SIGN UP
Health A-Z
Prevention & Treatment
Health Care
News
Meet Our Review Board
About Us
Editorial Process
Privacy Policy
In the News
Advertise
Terms of Service
Careers
Contact
Your Privacy Choices 
Follow Us
Verywell Health's content is for informational and educational purposes only. Our website is not intended to be a substitute for professional medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment.
Ⓒ 2026 People Inc. — All rights reserved
Verywell Health is part of the People Inc. publishing family.