eee. THE INSTITUTE FOR
to Ah) FUNCTIONAL
“e3'ie, MEDICINE"
Artificial
Sweeteners
Artificial
Sweeteners
Artificial sweeteners are sweeteners that are notfound in nature. These
sweeteners contain few or no calories. They are often used inplace of
sugar or other caloric sweeteners inprocessed foods marketed as diet-
friendly or sugar-free.
Artificial sweeteners are sweeteners that are not found in nature. These
sweeteners contain few or no calories. They are often used in place of
sugar or other caloric sweeteners in processed foods marketed as diet-
friendly or sugar-free.
In the United States, several artificial sweeteners have been approved for use
in food. The following table lists these sweeteners, their common associated
brands, and the types of products in which they are often found.
Artificial Sweetener
Artificial Sweetener
Acesulfame-K (acesulfame potassium)
⋅ Associated brand names: Sunett®
Acesulfame-K (acesulfame potassium)
-
- Food usage:
Sunett®,
, Sweet One®
One®,
, Swiss Sweet®
Sweet®
⋅ Food usage: Combined with other artificial sweeteners for a more sugar-like taste
a more sugar-like
Advantame
- Associated brand names: None
- Food usage: Baked goods, processed foods
Advantame
⋅ Associated brand names: None
⋅ Food usage: Baked goods, processed foods
Aspartame
Aspartame
- Associated brand names: Equal®, NatraTaste®
⋅ Associated brand names: Equal®
, NatraTaste®
⋅ Food usage: Instant tea and coffee, powdered drink mix, pudding, soda, yogurt, gum
-
usage:
Neotame
⋅ Associated brand names: Newtame®
-
- Food usage:
Newtame®
⋅ Food usage: Baked goods, processed foods
goods, processed
Saccharin
- Associated brand names: Sweet’N Low®, Sugar Twin®, Necta Sweet®
- Food usage: Baked goods, candy, canned fruit, jam, salad dressing, soda, gum
- Non-food usage: Lip gloss, mouthwash, toothpaste, medications, vitamin supplements
Saccharin
⋅ Associated brand names: Sweet’N Low®, Sugar Twin®, Necta Sweet®
⋅ Food usage: Baked goods, candy, canned fruit, jam, salad dressing, soda, gum
⋅ Non-food usage: Lip gloss, mouthwash, toothpaste, medications, vitamin supplements
Sucralose
- Associated brand names: Splenda®
- Food usage: Baked goods, frozen dairy desserts, fruit juice, gelatin, soda, gum
Stevia*
- Associated brand names: PureVia®, Rebiana®, Splenda Naturals®, Truvia®
- Food usage: Baked goods, processed foods, soft drinks
Sucralose
⋅ Associated brand names: Splenda®
⋅ Food usage: Baked goods, frozen dairy desserts, fruit juice, gelatin, soda, gum
Stevia*
⋅ Associated brand names: PureVia®, Rebiana®, Splenda Naturals®, Truvia®
⋅ Food usage: Baked goods, processed foods, soft drinks
*Natural stevia is not considered an artificial sweetener, but some brands use chemicals during
processing or include additives or fillers.
*Natural stevia is not considered an artificial sweetener, but some brands use chemicals during
processing or include additives or fillers.
©202 - Thy Inctituta far Eunctional Medicine
© 2022 The Institute for Functional Medicine
Version 4
Version 4
coffee, powdered
mix, pudding, soda, yogurt, gum
In the United States, several artificial sweeteners have been approved for use
in food. The following table lists these sweeteners, their common associated
brands, and the types of products in which they are often found.

History of Artificial Sweeteners
Food manufacturers began developing artificial sweeteners and marketing
them as healthy alternatives to refined sugar as early as 1880. These sugar
substitutes became increasingly popular in the 1960s and are still widely used
today. The FDA endorses the safety of artificial sweeteners, but there is a lack
of high-quality, evidence-based research on humans to encourage their use.
Are Artificial Sweeteners Safe?
One of the main concerns about artificial sweeteners is the uncertainty
about their potential to cause harm in the body. Some artificial sweeteners
have been linked to increased risk of heart disease, digestive symptoms,
headaches, kidney disease, some forms of cancer, obesity, and more.1-3
Artificial sweeteners are not recommended for children or pregnant women.
Another concern about artificial sweeteners is how they affect the body
and brain’s ability to gauge how much has been eaten. Providing sweetness
without calories confuses the body’s normal digestive processes. This can
lead to food cravings, overeating, and metabolic diseases and disorders.4 For
best health, it is recommended that only minimal amounts of sugars, natural
sweeteners, and artificial sweeteners be consumed regularly. A balanced diet
rich in whole foods and minimal inclusion of processed foods and additives
is preferred. Talk to your functional medicine provider for natural sweetener
recommendations.
A Note About Stevia
Stevia is marketed as a natural, no-calorie alternative sweetener. It is made
from the plant Stevia rebaudiana, but packaged stevia and other sweeteners
made with stevia aren’t always 100% natural. To make it shelf-stable, some
brands include additives and fillers that can cause adverse reactions to food.
To be sure you choose the purest, natural form of stevia, look for brands with
only one ingredient: organic stevia leaves.
REFERENCES
1. Lohner S, Toews I, Meerpohl J. Health outcomes of non-nutritive sweeteners: analysis of the research landscape. Nutr J.
2017;16(1):55. doi:10.1186/s12937-017-0278-x.
Xs
Gy
© 2022 The Institute for Functional Medicine
2. Azad M, Abou-Setta A, Chauhan B, et al. Nonnutritive sweeteners and cardiometabolic health: a systematic review and
meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials and prospective cohort studies. CMAJ. 2017;189(28):E929–E939. doi:10.1503/
cmaj.161390.
3. Mishra A, Ahmed K, Froghi S, Dasgupta P. Systematic review of the relationship between artificial sweetener consumption and
cancer in humans: analysis of 599,741 participants. Int J Clin Pract. 2015;69(12):1418–1426. doi:10.1111/ijcp.12703.
4. Romo-Romo A, Aguilar-Salinas CA, Brito-Córdova GX, Gómez Díaz RA, Vilchis Valentín D, Almeda-Valdes P. Effects of the non-
nutritive sweeteners on glucose metabolism and appetite regulating hormones: systematic review of observational prospective
studies and clinical trials. PLoS One. 2016;11(8):e0161264. Published 2016 Aug 18. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0161264.
Version 4
