£eee
“ace ~THE INSTITUTE FOR
gS Ak) FUNCTIONAL
Seee’ia) MEDICINE”
=cee
Cooking to
Preserve Nutrients
Cooking to
Preserve Nutrients
Cooking has an impact on the nutrient content offoods. As soon as afruit or
vegetable is picked, itbegins to lose nutrients. Generally, the best way toget
the most nutrients from yourproduce is byeating rawfruits and vegetables,
but that’s not always realistic.
Cooking has an impact on the nutrient content of foods. As soon as a fruit or
vegetable is picked, it begins to lose nutrients. Generally, the best way to get
the most nutrients from your produce is by eating raw fruits and vegetables,
but that’s not always realistic.
While fruit is mostly consumed raw, other foods like vegetables, grains,
legumes, and animal proteins are often consumed after they’ve been cooked.
While it’s true that cooking can destroy some nutrients in food, it can also
make other nutrients more easily absorbed and used by the body. The
cooking process also:
While fruit is mostly consumed raw, other foods like vegetables, grains,
legumes, and animal proteins are often consumed after they've been cooked.
While it’s true that cooking can destroy some nutrients in food, it can also
make other nutrients more easily absorbed and used by the body. The
cooking process also:
¢ Makes high-fiber foods and animal proteins easier to digest
¢ Makes foods that are hard or tough in their raw form easier to chew
¢ Destroys parts of plants that can be harmful
• Makes high-fiber foods and animal proteins easier to digest
• Makes foods that are hard or tough in their raw form easier to chew
• Destroys parts of plants that can be harmful
Because there are benefits to both cooked and raw foods, it’s best to eat a
variety of both every day. This will help you maximize your intake of beneficial
Because there are benefits to both cooked and raw foods, it’s best to eat a
variety of both every day. This will help you maximize your intake of beneficial
nutrients.
Cooking Tips
• When it comes to maximizing nutrient content, gentle cooking methods are
generally better. So, use as little heat, liquid, and time as possible to cook
your food.
Cooking Tips
e When it comes to maximizing nutrient content, gentle cooking methods are
generally better. So, use as little heat, liquid, and time as possible to cook
your food.
e When cooking with fats and oils, make sure to choose the right one for the
job. Foods cooked on high heat should be cooked in a fat or oil with a high
smoke point. Fats and oils heated beyond their smoke point (that is, the
point at which they smoke and burn) can be harmful.
• When cooking with fats and oils, make sure to choose the right one for the
job. Foods cooked on high heat should be cooked in a fat or oil with a high
smoke point. Fats and oils heated beyond their smoke point (that is, the
point at which they smoke and burn) can be harmful.
¢ If cooking or re-heating food in a microwave, use glass or ceramic
containers, as harmful chemicals can leech out of plastic containers and
into your food.
• If cooking or re-heating food in a microwave, use glass or ceramic
containers, as harmful chemicals can leech out of plastic containers and
into your food.
e Making soups and stews is a good way to maximize the nutrient content of
your food. During the cooking process, nutrients that leech out of individual
foods end up in the cooking liquid, which is eaten as part of the meal.
• Making soups and stews is a good way to maximize the nutrient content of
your food. During the cooking process, nutrients that leech out of individual
foods end up in the cooking liquid, which is eaten as part of the meal.
Cooking Methods
• Bake or Roast: Foods are gently cooked using hot dry air, usually in an oven.
Because no additional liquid is added to food during this method, most
vitamins, minerals, and other nutrients remain in the food. Baking involves
Cooking Methods
e Bake or Roast: Foods are gently cooked using hot dry air, usually in an oven.
Because no additional liquid is added to food during this method, most
vitamins, minerals, and other nutrients remain in the food. Baking involves
©2027 + ne institute tor runctional Medicine
© 2022 The Institute for Functional Medicine
Version 3
Version 3

cooking foods that lack a solid structure until they become solid (e.g., cakes,
muffins). Roasting involves cooking foods that have a solid structure before
cooking begins (e.g., meat and vegetables).
• Boil or Blanch: This water-based cooking method uses hot water (212°F, or
100°C) to cook food. Boiling is a longer cooking method (e.g. 5-20 minutes)
and blanching is a quick cooking method (e.g. 1 minute). Because boiling
is an intense process, most of the nutrients leech out of the food and into
the cooking liquid. If the food is drained before eating, many of the vitamins
and minerals will be lost. To get the most nutrients, blanch vegetables
whenever possible or consume the liquid when boiling food (as in the case
of a soup or stew).
• Fry or Sauté: Foods are fried quickly in small amount of hot fat or oil.
Healthy fats and oils, like olive oil, will help your body absorb fat-soluble
nutrients (such as Vitamins A, D, E, and K) from your food. Any liquid that
is released from vegetables when sautéing should also be consumed, as
some vitamins and minerals may have leeched out into the liquid during the
cooking process.
• Microwave: Electromagnetic waves stimulate the molecules in food, making
them vibrate and spin, which heats the food. This is generally a quick
process with water-based foods. Foods that contain fats and oils heat less
evenly, and may require more cooking time. Foods should be microwaved in
glass or ceramic containers only. Do not cook in plastic containers.
• Slow Cook: Foods are cooked gently, usually in a liquid, over low heat for
an extended period of time. Because a lot of water-soluble vitamins and
minerals will leech into the liquid during cooking, this method is a good
choice for soups, stews, and other one-pot meals that will use the cooking
liquid. The best way to maximize the nutrient content of meals cooked in a
slow-cooker is to cook everything except the vegetables for an extended
time, then add the vegetables during the last half-hour of cooking.
• Steam: Foods are cooked gently above, but not touching, boiling water.
Instead, steam from boiling water provides heat to cook the food, usually
for a short amount of time. Because of the gentle nature of the method,
little water from the food is lost, so most nutrients remain intact. On the
downside, no cooking fat is involved in the process. This means that any fat-
soluble vitamins in the food won’t be absorbed by the body, unless steamed
food is served or finished with some sort of fat or oil (e.g., avocado, olive
oil, nuts, etc.).
• Simmer or Poach: These cooking methods are similar to boiling, in that
they are liquid-based methods. The only difference between them is the
temperature of the liquid used, which impacts the intensity. Food that is
simmered is heated to 185-200°F (85-93°C). Simmering is appropriate for
sauces, soups, stews, and tough cuts of meat. At a simmer, food is moved
around enough to allow flavors to mix, but not moved so much that the
food is damaged. Poached foods are not cooked above 180°F (82°C).
Poaching is best for delicate foods like eggs, poultry, fish, and fruit, all
of which can easily dry out with other cooking methods.
© 2022 The Institute for Functional Medicine
Version 3
