£oo»
1910P=. THE INSTITUTE FOR
ages <8)FUNCTIONAL
Nessie? MEDICINE*
Fish and Toxins: Safe
Food Guidelines
Fish and Toxins: Safe
Food Guidelines
One ofthe healthiestfood choices is fish. Besides being a source oflow-fat
and high-quality protein, it is a rich source ofvital nutrients such as vitamin
D—a nutrient that manypeople must supplement because ofdeficiency. Fish
is also rich in calcium andphosphorus, as well as other minerals such as
iron, zinc, iodine, magnesium, andpotassium.
One of the healthiest food choices is fish. Besides being a source of low-fat
and high-quality protein, it is a rich source of vital nutrients such as vitamin
D—a nutrient that many people must supplement because of deficiency. Fish
is also rich in calcium and phosphorus, as well as other minerals such as
iron, zinc, iodine, magnesium, and potassium.
While fish in general is a healthy food choice, some fish are better choices
than others. Fatty types of fish are considered the healthiest, because they are
good sources of omega-3 fatty acids and vitamin D. Omega-3 fatty acids are
essential for your body and brain to function optimally and are strongly linked
to reduced risk of many diseases. Many studies have shown that people who
eat fish regularly have a lower risk of heart attacks, strokes, and death from
heart disease.
While fish in general is a healthy food choice, some fish are better choices
than others. Fatty types of fish are considered the healthiest, because they are
good sources of omega-3 fatty acids and vitamin D. Omega-3 fatty acids are
essential for your body and brain to function optimally and are strongly linked
to reduced risk of many diseases. Many studies have shown that people who
eat fish regularly have a lower risk of heart attacks, strokes, and death from
heart disease.
I’ve heard that somefish contain toxins and heavy metals like mercury.
Which types offish are safe to eat?
I’ve heard that some fish contain toxins and heavy metals like mercury.
Which types of fish are safe to eat?
Unfortunately, environmental pollutants such as dioxins and polychlorinated
biphenyls (PCBs) can accumulate in foods, including fish. Some fish also
contain higher levels of heavy metals such as mercury, which can be toxic to
the nervous, digestive, and immune systems. Fish that should be avoided
because of mercury contamination include: shark, ray, swordfish, marlin, king
mackerel, tilefish, orange roughy, ling, and southern bluefin tuna.
Unfortunately, environmental pollutants such as dioxins and polychlorinated
biphenyls (PCBs) can accumulate in foods, including fish. Some fish also
contain higher levels of heavy metals such as mercury, which can be toxic to
the nervous, digestive, and immune systems. Fish that should be avoided
because of mercury contamination include: shark, ray, swordfish, marlin, king
mackerel, tilefish, orange roughy, ling, and southern bluefin tuna.
Safe fish choices that typically contain lower levels of mercury include:
Safe fish choices that typically contain lower levels of mercury include:
e Salmon
e Sardines
e Herring
e Trout
e Canned light tuna
© Pollock
© Catfish
¢ Shellfish such as prawns,
lobsters, and oysters
• Salmon
• Sardines
• Herring
• Trout
• Canned light tuna
• Pollock
• Catfish
• Shellfish such as prawns,
lobsters, and oysters
©202 - The Institute for Functional Medicine
© 2022 The Institute for Functional Medicine
Version 4
Version 4

Not all fish categories are nutritionally equal and sourcing affects nutrient
quality and toxin levels. Fish that specifically have lower levels of mercury and
are also rich in omega-3s include:
• Atlantic mackerel (also known as purse seine, from Canada and the U.S.)
• Pacific sardines (wild-caught)
• Freshwater coho salmon (farmed in tank systems, from the U.S.)
• Salmon (wild-caught, from Alaska)
How much fish should I eat per week, and what’s the bottom line?
As a general rule, the American Heart Association recommends eating
fish at least two times per week as part of a healthy diet. Additionally, the
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) makes specific recommendations for
fish consumption.
Advisories for fish consumption may be issued for specific groups of people at
risk of harm, including:
• Children
• Elderly persons
• Pregnant or nursing individuals
• Those who may become pregnant
• High consumers of fish
The EPA’s Recommendations for Fish Consumption:
Do Not Eat
Fish high in mercury: king mackerel,
shark, swordfish, tilefish
Fish for which a tribal, local, state, or
federal advisory has been issued.
Check advisories for your area at
EPA Fish Advisory Online
Eat in Moderation
(up to 6 ounces per week)
Albacore (white) tuna
Fish caught from local lakes, rivers,
and coastal areas (Note: if eating
these fish, do not consume other
fish during the week)
Do Eat
(up to 12 ounces per week)
Fish low in mercury: canned light
tuna, catfish, pollock, salmon,
shrimp
REFERENCES
1. Ruxton CH, Reed SC, Simpson MJ, Millington KJ. The health benefits of omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids: a review of the
evidence. J Hum Nutr Diet. 2004 Oct;17(5):449-59.
Xs
Gy
© 2022 The Institute for Functional Medicine
2. Health Benefits of Fish. Washington State Department of Health. Doh.wa.gov. https://www.doh.wa.gov/
CommunityandEnvironment/Food/Fish/HealthBenefits.
3. Seafood and Human Health from the Seafood Watch Program at the Monterey Bay Aquarium. Seafoodwatch.org. http://www.
seafoodwatch.org/consumers/seafood-and-your-health.
4. Torpy JM, Lynm C, Glass RM. Eating Fish: Health Benefits and Risks. JAMA. 2006;296(15):1926. doi:10.1001/jama.296.15.1926
5. The benefits of eating fish. Seafood Selector. http://seafood.edf.org/benefits-eating-fish.
Version 4
