ages <8) FUNCTIONAL
Nessie, MEDICINE*
£em
1910
THE INSTITUTE FOR
Health Benefits of Spices
Health Benefits of Spices
There are many benefits ofeating a diet rich in spices. Spices provide a
wide variety offlavor combinations to enhance the taste ofhealthyfoods,
and they contain phytonutrients that protect our bodies by reducing
harmful amounts ofinflammation and oxidative stress. As with allplant
foods, eat a variety ofspices regularlyfor the greatest health benefits.
There are many benefits of eating a diet rich in spices. Spices provide a
wide variety of flavor combinations to enhance the taste of healthy foods,
and they contain phytonutrients that protect our bodies by reducing
harmful amounts of inflammation and oxidative stress. As with all plant
foods, eat a variety of spices regularly for the greatest health benefits.
Health Benefits
Eating a diet rich in spices has been associated with improved blood sugar
health, blood vessel health, digestive health, a greater sense of fullness from
meals, and even a lower risk of death. Below are some ofthe health benefits
shown in research studies.
Eating a diet rich in spices has been associated with improved blood sugar
health, blood vessel health, digestive health, a greater sense of fullness from
meals, and even a lower risk of death. Below are some of the health benefits
shown in research studies.
• Cardamom: anti-inflammatory, blood sugar health, cell protection, heart
health
¢ Cardamom: anti-inflammatory, blood sugar health, cell protection, heart
• Cinnamon: anti-inflammatory, blood sugar health, heart health
• Cumin: blood sugar health, cell protection, heart health
• Fennel: digestive health, hormonal health
¢
¢
e
anti-inflammatory, blood sugar health, heart health
blood sugar health, cell protection, heart health
digestive health, hormonal health
• Garlic: anti-inflammatory, blood sugar health, blood vessel health, cell
protection, heart health, liver health
® Garlic: anti-inflammatory, blood sugar health, blood vessel health, cell
protection, heart health, liver health
¢ Ginger: anti-inflammatory, blood sugar health, cell protection, digestive
health, heart health, pain relief
• Ginger: anti-inflammatory, blood sugar health, cell protection, digestive
health, heart health, pain relief
• Saffron: blood sugar health, brain health, cell protection, heart health
• Turmeric: anti-inflammatory, blood sugar health, brain health, digestive
health, heart health
¢ Saffron: blood sugar health, brain health, cell protection, heart health
e Turmeric: anti-inflammatory, blood sugar health, brain health, digestive
health, heart health
While very high amounts of spices (or isolated chemicals within spices) are
typically used in medical research, some studies have shown that even culinary
amounts of spices have health benefits.
While very high amounts of spices (or isolated chemicals within spices) are
typically used in medical research, some studies have shown that even culinary
amounts of spices have health benefits.
Health Benefits
©2022 The Institute for Functional Medicine
© 2022 The Institute for Functional Medicine
Version 2 (image courtesy of 123rf)
Version 2 (image courtesy of 123rf)

Tips for Buying and Storing Spices
• Avoid spices that contain fillers (e.g., sugar, maltodextrin, gluten, artificial
colors, preservatives, synthetic anti-caking agents).
• If you buy spices in bulk, store them in air-tight glass or tin containers.
Store in a cool, dark place. Heat, light, and moisture will accelerate loss of
flavor. Don’t buy large quantities – buy what you think you’ll use within 6-12
months.
• You can buy spices in their fresh, dried, whole, cracked, coarsely ground,
and finely ground forms.
• High temperatures can cause spices to cake or harden and change or lose
color.
• Under ideal conditions, ground spices will keep for about a year and whole
spices for 2-3 years. To test, rub between fingers to detect an aroma. If you
smell it clearly, it’s still potent.
Tips for Eating More Spices
• Add cinnamon or ginger to smoothies or coffee.
• Sprinkle cumin, red pepper, or fennel seeds in soups.
• Stew fruits with a cinnamon stick, cardamom, and a vanilla pod.
• Marinate lean meats in curry powder or curry pastes.
• Sprinkle cinnamon and nutmeg over oatmeal or whole grain toast for
breakfast.
• Choose meals from cuisines around the world for the widest variety of
spices.
Overall Takeaway: Spices have more benefits than simply providing flavor.
Aim to eat a variety of spices every day.
© 2022 The Institute for Functional Medicine
Version 2 (references available in separate bibliography)
