vgs 38) FUNCTIONAL
£eer
(9!e «OTHE INSTITUTE FOR
Nese’ief MEDICINE®
=cee
Micronutrients for
Insulin Sensitivity
Micronutrients for
Insulin Sensitivity
Insulin is theprimary hormone that controls blood sugar levels in the body.
Insulin resistance is a condition where muscles and other tissues do not
respond to insulin as expected. Insulin resistance causes the body to make
more and more insulin to keep blood sugar in a healthy range. Over time, the
body’s ability toproduce higher amounts ofinsulin is exhausted, which can
lead to the development ofprediabetes and eventually type 2 diabetes.
Insulin is the primary hormone that controls blood sugar levels in the body.
Insulin resistance is a condition where muscles and other tissues do not
respond to insulin as expected. Insulin resistance causes the body to make
more and more insulin to keep blood sugar in a healthy range. Over time, the
body’s ability to produce higher amounts of insulin is exhausted, which can
lead to the development of prediabetes and eventually type 2 diabetes.
STRATEGIES TO SUPPORT
INSULIN SENSITIVITY
STRATEGIES TO SUPPORT
INSULIN SENSITIVITY
e Vitamin D
e Magnesium
• Vitamin D
• Magnesium
e Zinc
• Zinc
Vitamin D
Vitamin D
¢ Alpha-lipoic acid
¢ Probiotics
¢ Chromium
e CoQ10
• Alpha-lipoic acid
• Probiotics
• Chromium
•
e Physical activity
° Sleep
• Physical activity
• Sleep
e Stress management
• Stress management
VitaminD is a fat-soluble vitamin that also acts like a hormone in the body.
There are vitamin D receptors on many cells throughout the body, including
insulin-secreting pancreatic beta cells. Studies show that lower vitamin D
levels are associated with insulin resistance.! People with low blood levels of
the nutrient should supplement with vitamin D (preferably the D3 form) and
monitor their blood levels to adjust supplement dosages accordingly.
Vitamin D is a fat-soluble vitamin that also acts like a hormone in the body.
There are vitamin D receptors on many cells throughout the body, including
insulin-secreting pancreatic beta cells. Studies show that lower vitamin D
levels are associated with insulin resistance.1 People with low blood levels of
the nutrient should supplement with vitamin D (preferably the D3 form) and
monitor their blood levels to adjust supplement dosages accordingly.
Common vitamin D sources: sunlight exposure, wild salmon, sardines, organic
whole milk (fortified), and egg yolks
Common vitamin D sources: sunlight exposure, wild salmon, sardines, organic
whole milk (fortified), and egg yolks
Magnesium
Magnesium
Magnesium is an essential mineral that supports bone health, blood pressure,
and insulin function. It also participates in hundreds of metabolic reactions.
People who don’t get enough magnesium are at higher risk for type 2
diabetes, heart disease, metabolic syndrome, and osteoporosis.”
Some individuals may have a higher functional need for magnesium, which
requires supplementation.? Supplemental magnesium comes in several forms,
some of which have a laxative effect. Talk to your functional medicine provider
to determine which magnesium supplement is best for you.
Common magnesium sources: nuts, avocado, garbanzo beans, leafy greens,
and whole grains
Magnesium is an essential mineral that supports bone health, blood pressure,
and insulin function. It also participates in hundreds of metabolic reactions.
People who don’t get enough magnesium are at higher risk for type 2
diabetes, heart disease, metabolic syndrome, and osteoporosis.2
Some individuals may have a higher functional need for magnesium, which
requires supplementation.2 Supplemental magnesium comes in several forms,
some of which have a laxative effect. Talk to your functional medicine provider
to determine which magnesium supplement is best for you.
Common magnesium sources: nuts, avocado, garbanzo beans, leafy greens,
and whole grains
© 2022 The Institute for Functional Medicine'
©20:
nal Medicine
Version 2
Version 2
Several things can increase the responsiveness of muscles and tissues to
insulin, including regular cardio and resistance exercise, stress management,
good sleep, maintaining a healthy weight, and nutrition. Summarized here
are several nutritional factors that support insulin sensitivity, especially when
combined with an overall healthy diet and lifestyle.
Several things can increase the responsiveness of muscles and tissues to
insulin, including regular cardio and resistance exercise, stress management,
good sleep, maintaining a healthy weight, and nutrition. Summarized here
are several nutritional factors that support insulin sensitivity, especially when
combined with an overall healthy diet and lifestyle.

Tip: Physical activity, sleep,
and stress management
are powerful natural
insulin sensitizers. Taking
a supplement without
addressing these lifestyle
factors is unlikely to address
insulin resistance long term.
Zinc
Zinc is an essential mineral involved in growth and development, immune
system function, vision, fertility, and antioxidant production. Zinc is also
essential for normal insulin function. Low levels of zinc are associated with
impaired insulin secretion and decreased insulin sensitivity.3 In multiple
studies, zinc supplementation has been shown to improve insulin resistance.3
Supplementing with zinc may lead to deficiencies in other minerals. Work with
your healthcare practitioner to determine the right dose and duration for you.
Common zinc sources: oysters, grass-fed beef, organic soybeans, yogurt,
nuts, legumes, and cheese
Alpha-Lipoic Acid
Alpha-lipoic acid, also called lipoic acid, is a substance made in the body and
found naturally in many fruits and vegetables. It is involved in cellular energy
production and is an antioxidant that protects nerves and other tissues. Some
research shows that alpha-lipoic acid supports a healthy weight, which in turn
helps insulin sensitivity.4 Multiple studies have shown that alpha-lipoic acid
also reduces symptoms of diabetic nerve pain.5
Common alpha-lipoic acid sources: spinach, broccoli, peas, Brussels sprouts,
tomatoes, and grass-fed organ meats
Probiotics
Probiotics are beneficial microbes that have a positive effect on your gut
microbiome. The gut microbiome is the collection of bacteria, yeasts, and
viruses that live in your digestive tract. Although probiotics do not colonize
the gut, they provide benefits as they pass through your digestive system.
Probiotics are associated with improvement in digestive symptoms, like gas
and bloating. Emerging research shows probiotics may also have beneficial
effects on reducing blood sugar, insulin, and hemoglobin A1c (average blood
sugar), especially for those who have type 2 or gestational diabetes.6
Common probiotic sources: yogurt, kefir, fermented foods (e.g., kimchi,
sauerkraut, miso, etc.), and probiotic supplements
Chromium
Chromium is a trace mineral required in very small amounts. It is thought
to play a role in insulin function, but its exact mechanism is unclear. Studies
looking at the effect of chromium supplementation on insulin resistance
and blood sugar control are inconsistent, with a smaller number of studies
showing positive benefits, mainly in those who have diabetes.7 Other studies
suggest that chromium and biotin (vitamin B7) combined may help lower
hemoglobin A1c and cholesterol.8 Those at risk for kidney disease should not
take chromium supplements.
Common chromium sources: broccoli, organic turkey breast, green beans,
grapes, oranges, apples, and bananas
© 2022 The Institute for Functional Medicine
Version 2

CoQ10
Co-enzyme Q10 (CoQ10) is a fat-soluble substance made by the body and
found in food. CoQ10 is involved in cellular energy production. A form of
CoQ10 called ubiquinol also acts as an antioxidant in the body. CoQ10 has
been shown to increase insulin sensitivity in individuals without diabetes and
may modestly lower blood sugar in those with type 2 diabetes.9,10
The body’s production of CoQ10 decreases with age. Certain medications,
like statins, have been shown to deplete CoQ10 in the body.
Common CoQ10 sources: grass-fed beef, organic chicken, fish, sesame seeds,
pistachios, and broccoli
REFERENCES
1. Chiu K, Chu A, Go V, Saad M. Hypovitaminosis D is associated with insulin resistance and beta cell dysfunction. Am J Clin Nutr.
2004;79(5):820–825. doi:10.1093/ajcn/79.5.820.
2. Gröber U, Schmidt J, Kisters K. Magnesium in prevention and therapy. Nutrients. 2015;7(9):8199–8226. doi:10.3390/nu7095388.
3. Wang X, Wu W, Zheng W, et al. Zinc supplementation improves glycemic control for diabetes prevention and management:
a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Am J Clin Nutr. 2019;110(1):76–90. doi:10.1093/ajcn/
nqz041.
4. Kucukgoncu S, Zhou E, Lucas K, Tek C. Alpha-lipoic acid (ALA) as a supplementation for weight loss: results from a meta-
analysis of randomized controlled trials. Obes Rev. 2017;18(5):594–601. doi:10.1111/obr.12528.
5. Porasuphatana S, Suddee S, Nartnampong A, Konsil J, Harnwong B, Santaweesuk A. Glycemic and oxidative status of patients
with type 2 diabetes mellitus following oral administration of alpha-lipoic acid: a randomized double-blinded placebo-controlled
study. Asia Pac J Clin Nutr. 2012;21(1):12–21.
6. Wang X, Juan Q, He Y, Zhuang L, Fang Y, Wang Y. Multiple effects of probiotics on different types of diabetes: a systematic
review and meta-analysis of randomized, placebo-controlled trials. J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab. 2017;30(6):611–622.
doi:10.1515/jpem-2016-0230.
7. Martin J, Wang Z, Zhang X, et al. Chromium picolinate supplementation attenuates body weight gain and increases insulin
sensitivity in subjects with type 2 diabetes. Diabetes Care. 2006;29(8):1826–1832. doi:10.2337/dc06-0254.
8. Albarracin C, Fuqua B, Geohas J, Juturu V, Finch M, Komorowski J. Combination of chromium and biotin improves coronary
risk factors in hypercholesterolemic type 2 diabetes mellitus: a placebo-controlled, double-blind randomized clinical trial. J
Cardiometab Syndr. 2007;2(2):91–97. doi:10.1111/j.1559-4564.2007.06366.x.
9. Moradi M, Haghighatdoost F, Feizi A, Larijani B, Azadbakht L. Effect of coenzyme Q10 supplementation on diabetes
biomarkers: a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled clinical trials. Arch Iran Med. 2016;19(8):588–596.
10. Oregon State University, Linus Pauling Institute, Micronutrient Information Center. Coenzyme Q10. https://lpi.oregonstate.edu/
mic/dietary-factors/coenzyme-Q10. Reviewed May 2019. Accessed January 28, 2020.
© 2022 The Institute for Functional Medicine
Version 2
