£oer
6one ~THE INSTITUTE FOR
gS Ak) FUNCTIONAL
Seee’ia) MEDICINE”
=cee
Overview of Sweeteners
Overview of Sweeteners
Ifyoufind yourselfconfused by the many different types ofsweeteners
found inprocessedfoods, you’re not alone. Manyprocessedfoods contain
multiple forms ofsweeteners, which can make it difficult to determine
the various types ofsugar thefood contains. Infunctional nutrition,
“sugar” is an umbrella term that is used to describe thefour main types of
sweeteners: caloric sweeteners, artificial sweeteners, sugar alcohols, and
natural sugar alternatives.
If you find yourself confused by the many different types of sweeteners
found in processed foods, you’re not alone. Many processed foods contain
multiple forms of sweeteners, which can make it difficult to determine
the various types of sugar the food contains. In functional nutrition,
“sugar” is an umbrella term that is used to describe the four main types of
sweeteners: caloric sweeteners, artificial sweeteners, sugar alcohols, and
natural sugar alternatives.
Caloric Sweeteners
Caloric sweeteners are any sweetener that contains calories, including
natural sweeteners like honey. These sweeteners are found in a wide
Caloric Sweeteners
Caloric sweeteners are any sweetener that contains calories, including
natural sweeteners like honey. These sweeteners are found in a wide
variety of foods, including most packaged foods. Consuming these
sweeteners frequently, especially in sugar-sweetened beverages, have
been associated with an increased risk of several chronic diseases.
Limiting caloric sweeteners is important for overall health.
variety of foods, including most packaged foods. Consuming these
sweeteners frequently, especially in sugar-sweetened beverages, have
been associated with an increased risk of several chronic diseases.
Limiting caloric sweeteners is important for overall health.
Examples: table sugar (sucrose), agave, brown rice syrup, coconut sugar,
crystalline fructose, dextrose, fruit juice concentrates, glucose syrup,
high-fructose corn syrup, honey, maltodextrin, maple syrup, molasses,
trehalose
Examples: table sugar (sucrose), agave, brown rice syrup, coconut sugar,
crystalline fructose, dextrose, fruit juice concentrates, glucose syrup,
high-fructose corn syrup, honey, maltodextrin, maple syrup, molasses,
trehalose
Artificial Sweeteners
Artificial sweeteners are any sweetener that is not found in nature,
Artificial Sweeteners
Artificial sweeteners are any sweetener that is not found in nature,
contains few or no calories, and is used in place of caloric sweeteners.
These are often used in processed foods (often marketed as “sugar free”
or “diet-friendly”), toothpaste, and mouthwash. Artificial sweeteners
are a controversial topic, as some studies report negative health
associations and other research supports their use in moderation. In
some circumstances, an artificial sweetener may be preferable to other
sweetener choices. For more information, see IFM’s Artificial Sweeteners
document.
contains few or no calories, and is used in place of caloric sweeteners.
These are often used in processed foods (often marketed as “sugar free”
or “diet-friendly”), toothpaste, and mouthwash. Artificial sweeteners
are a controversial topic, as some studies report negative health
associations and other research supports their use in moderation. In
some circumstances, an artificial sweetener may be preferable to other
sweetener choices. For more information, see IFM’s Artificial Sweeteners
document.
Examples: acesulfame K, aspartame, advantame, neotame, saccharin,
stevia, sucralose, and all brand-name sweeteners that contain these
(NutraSweet, Splenda, Equal, Sweet N’Low)
Examples: acesulfame K, aspartame, advantame, neotame, saccharin,
stevia, sucralose, and all brand-name sweeteners that contain these
(NutraSweet, Splenda, Equal, Sweet N’Low)
Sugar Alcohols
Sugar Alcohols
Sugar alcohols have fewer calories than caloric sweeteners, and they
aren't as sweet as sugar. They are manufactured or derived from some
fruits and vegetables. They are often added to baked goods, fruit
spreads, chewing gum, mouthwash, toothpaste, and other processed
Sugar alcohols have fewer calories than caloric sweeteners, and they
aren’t as sweet as sugar. They are manufactured or derived from some
fruits and vegetables. They are often added to baked goods, fruit
spreads, chewing gum, mouthwash, toothpaste, and other processed
©2027 7!.2 Institute for Functional Medicine
© 2022 The Institute for Functional Medicine
Version 3
Version 3

foods. One advantage to consuming these is they do not cause dental
cavities. These should be avoided if you have digestive problems (like
bacterial overgrowth, yeast overgrowth, or irritable bowel syndrome), as some
sugar alcohols can cause diarrhea and bloating.
Examples: erythritol, isomalt, lactitol, maltitol, mannitol, sorbitol, xylitol
Natural Sugar Alternatives
Natural, non-caloric sweeteners can be a good alternative when you are
trying to limit or avoid caloric sweeteners and artificial sweeteners. For more
information, see IFM’s Natural Sweeteners document.
Examples: monk fruit, allulose, stevia, tagatose
Added Sugars on Food Labels
It is recommended to limit all sweeteners, especially added sugars in foods
and beverages. Added sugars are caloric sweeteners that are not naturally
found in a food. They are very common in packaged foods, including in
unexpected foods like pasta sauce and bread. IFM recommends that added
sugars should be kept as low as possible. The American Heart Association
recommends that the maximum amount of added sugars a person should eat
in a day is:
• No more than 9 teaspoons for men (equal to 36 grams, or 150 calories
per day)
• No more than 6 teaspoons for women and children (equal to 25 grams,
or 100 calories per day)
To put those amounts in perspective, a can of soda or a candy bar contains
about 8 teaspoons of added sugar. Foods and beverages that commonly
contain added sugars include: baked goods and desserts, soda, teas, energy
drinks, breakfast cereals, soups, yogurts, breads, lunch meats, salad dressings,
and many processed foods.
The Relationship between Fiber and Sugar
The fiber in food helps determine how your body is impacted by both
naturally occurring and added sweeteners. When eating naturally sweet or
sweetened foods with little or no fiber, sugar enters the blood stream all at
once, causing a spike in blood sugar levels. This temporary energy boost, or
“sugar rush” is quickly followed by a crash, which results in low energy. Fiber
helps slow the body’s absorption of sugar and helps to keep blood sugar
balanced. This helps keep energy levels more even throughout the day.
Some foods with naturally occurring sugars lack fiber, but this doesn’t
necessarily mean they should be avoided. When eating foods or beverages
that lack fiber, it’s important to pair them with fiber-rich foods to help slow the
absorption of sugars into the bloodstream.
© 2022 The Institute for Functional Medicine
Version 3

Reading Food Labels
The top section of a food label contains information about the serving size
and the amount of servings in the entire container. In the label example below,
the entire package of food contains 8 servings, and one serving is equal to 2/3
cup, or 55 grams. To determine the amount of sugar you’ll eat, multiply the
grams listed on the label by the number of servings you eat from the package.
For example, if you eat 2 cups of this food (which is 3 servings based on the
listed serving size), you will be eating 36 grams of total sugars and 30 grams
of added sugars.
Artificial sweeteners, sugar alcohols, and natural sugar alternatives are not
included in the label’s sugar count. To determine if a food contains these types
of sweeteners, check the ingredients list of the food package.
Nutrition Facts
8 servings per container
Serving size
2/3 cup (55g)
Calories, 230
Total Fat 8g
Saturated Fat 1g
Total Sugars:
This number includes the
total amount of naturally
occurring sugar and added
sugars in the listed serving
size of this food.
Trans Fat Og
Cholesterol 0mg
Sodium 160mg
Total Carbohydrate 37g
Dietary Fiber 4g
% Daily Value*
10%
5%
0%
7%
13%
14%
Total Sugars 12g
Includes 10g Added Sugars 20%
Protein 3g
eee
Vitamin D 2mcg
Calcium 260mg
Iron 8mg
Potassium 235mg
10%
20%
45%
6%
* The % Daily Value (DV) tells you how much a nutrient in
a serving of food contributes to a daily diet. 2,000 calories
a day is used for general nutrition advice.
Added Sugars:
Total added sugars refers
to the amount of sugar
(in grams) that has been
added to one serving
of this food. This sugar
does not naturally occur
in the food; the food
manufacturer has added it.
Note that the listed %
Daily Value for added
sugar is based on 50
grams per day, which is
well over the American
Heart Association’s
recommendation.
as
“ys
REFERENCES
1. Johnson RK, Appel LJ, Brands M, et al. Dietary sugars intake and cardiovascular health: a scientific statement from the
American Heart Association. Circulation. 2009;120(11):1011-1020. doi:10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.109.192627.
2. Sylvetsky AC, Rother KI. Nonnutritive sweeteners in weight management and chronic disease: a review. Obesity (Silver
Spring). 2018;26(4):635-640. doi:10.1002/oby.22139.
© 2022 The Institute for Functional Medicine
Version 3
