An estimated 30 to 40 percent of the food supply in the United States is
wasted due to loss (never delivered or prepared) and waste (thrown away).
That’s more than 130 billion pounds of food per year! Hard to imagine,
right? Maybe not when you consider how every day, shoppers are enticed to buy
food in bulk but often end up throwing away the excess. Or how, all too often,
diners bag up restaurant leftovers only to let them languish in the fridge (or,
worse yet, in their car’s back seat), and then throw them out, packaging and all.
What do these examples have in common? Good intentions, yes. But also, unnecessary waste.
Many of us may not even realize how often we waste food, nor the impact that
waste can have on our communities. When you make a concerted effort to avoid
waste, you won’t be throwing away money or nutrition. Reducing your food waste
has the potential to have a positive impact on your health, your budget, and the
environment. This realization makes it even more convincing to work on wasting
less, and that effort begins at home.

What Is Zero Waste Cooking?
Zero waste cooking is a strategy to reduce food waste. It’s about using all the food
that you purchase, grow, or have access to, and leaving behind as little food and
packaging as possible. It’s something to feel good about as you save money and
reduce your impact on the planet.
Zero waste cooking is not about perfection or self-righteousness. Neither is it
about becoming vegetarian or eating less meat. Be wary of statements about
avoiding meat and dairy when in the context of zero waste cooking. The goal of
zero waste cooking is to reduce all food waste.
Zero waste cooking is about adopting a philosophy to waste less food in your
household no matter what your dietary choices are (of course I still want you to
make mostly healthy ones!). It’s about learning how to grocery shop more mindfully and efficiently to maximize your food and your food budget. It’s also about
having a plan for the food you buy and storing food properly.
Using food and ingredients wisely
In the United States and many parts of the world, we’re blessed with an abundant
food supply. We travel to grocery stores, expecting all the food and ingredients
that we desire to be there. (Skip to Chapter 2 to learn more about the food supply
chain and where your food comes from.) We expect our apples and tomatoes to be
blemish-free and our food to be fresh and appealing. We purchase what we need
(and sometimes more than we need) and bring it home to store on our shelves or
refrigerator or freezer. You could say, we’re a little spoiled.
To create a zero waste kitchen, you simply begin by being more thoughtful about
your purchases. You then start to rethink your leftovers and plan out how you’re
going to prepare every ingredient that goes into your shopping cart. You also may
have some second thoughts about perfect produce, realizing that a small blemish
here or there doesn’t impact the safety or nutrition of the food.
Shopping for what you need
and storing it properly
Zero waste cooking focuses on shopping for what you need, not what randomly
“looks good.” Grocery stores strategically set up their shelves and displays to
entice you to buy more. They place seasonal items at your eye level, and 
CHAPTER 1 Doing Your Best to Waste Less 11
companies pay a premium for the best shelf placement. But shopping only for
what you need will ultimately help reduce your food waste. You’ll find lots of tips
and strategies for sticking to your food budget and grocery list in Chapter 6.
A good shopping list makes trips to the grocery store more efficient. Your list
should include everything you need to create meals for the next week or two. You
might break your list into a big order or a few smaller orders, so think of your list
as a running inventory as well. These are planned purchases that fit your budget
and meal planning. Chapter 4 helps you analyze what you have, what you don’t
use or need, and what may be ending up in your garbage can too often. Here are a
few reminders to get you started:
» Use a list. Consider a digital app or keeping a running list on your
smartphone.
» Delay a purchase. When you see that tantalizing endcap, tell yourself to
make a note and think about it for your next trip. This will eliminate an
impulse buy but not deny the possibility of putting the item into your cart
next time.
» Don’t overspend. Have a budget in mind before you go and keep a rough
total as you shop.
» Choose quality over quantity. In most cases, it’s worth paying more for a
high-quality food product (say, cheese) than getting a larger portion of it
(more than you may need or be able to use).
» Store food properly. Once you bring the food home, storing it properly helps
preserve its quality and safety longer, thereby helping you reduce food waste.
Chapters 4, 5, and 6 offer you lots of ideas and tips for making food and
ingredients last longer. You may be surprised to find out what those best-by
dates really mean, or why you shouldn’t store avocadoes near bananas.
Making the most of scraps and leftovers
There are two kinds of people: those who love leftovers (usually the cooks of the
house!), and those who say, meh. I hope this book inspires you to look beyond
reheating a plate of turkey and mashed potatoes or a bowl of chili and instead create completely new dishes with those previously cooked ingredients.
As a wise cook once said, “Cook once; eat thrice.” Making use of leftovers, as well
as doing some batch cooking, will save you both time and money. It’ll also take
some of the day in, day out stress out of preparing dinner every night.
12 PART 1 Adopting a Food Waste Strategy
You don’t have to eat trendy foods to eat a well-balanced zero waste diet. Avocadoes may be all the rage, but they’re not the be-all and end-all for nutrition (and
they spoil rapidly). No one food holds that health halo. It’s the totality of your diet
through the week that impacts your nutrition status and your environmental
footprint. Healthy food doesn’t have to be fancy or expensive.
The meal planning ideas in Chapters 6 and 7 use the concept of creating a grocery
list with common ingredients that you can use in various ways through the week
to make different meals.
Some foods simply taste better the next day or two. Dishes like chilis, soups, casserole dishes, or lasagna, for instance, get even better after they sit for a while,
allowing all the flavors to come together. You won’t regret making extra servings
when you cook those dishes.
Adopting a Zero Waste Mindset
You probably picked up this book because you want to waste less in your kitchen
and you care about the environment. The goal of the book is to help you get started
and maintain a mostly zero waste lifestyle (mostly because, hey, nobody is perfect). While Chapter 3 gets into the nitty-gritty of creating a zero waste mindset,
an overarching theme throughout the book is “progress, not perfection.” As
you  wrap your mind around the idea of wasting less food, the book addresses
several things:
» How the idea of sustainability fits into a zero waste mindset (see more in
Chapter 2)
» The three pillars of sustainability in agriculture and how they allow for the
efficient use of natural resources to feed hundreds of millions of people
» How various sectors of the food supply chain conserve resources and work to
reduce food waste
» How to analyze your personal food waste habits and create a plan to
waste less
» How to choose foods with both your budget and health needs in mind
» How to organize a zero waste kitchen
» How to plan meals, waste less, and cook delicious meals
You may wonder why I cover things like sustainability, the food supply chain, and
the U.S. agriculture system that brings you your food. Well, it’s important to
know how the environmental piece of reducing food waste fits into the larger 
CHAPTER 1 Doing Your Best to Waste Less 13
picture of where food comes from. There’s a lot of conflicting information about
the “best diet,” the many sources of greenhouse gas emissions, and how various
sectors impact the environment. Hopefully, this information will give you more
to think about.
Many things impact climate change. This book assumes that the more than
333 million people in the United States have a variety of food budgets and circumstances. This book was written with the broad spectrum of food budgets and
food availability, both rural and urban, in mind. The recipes and meal planning
strategies I include were designed for everyone — not just those with a specialty
grocer down the block — so they can enjoy eating for good health and learn how
to waste less.
Benefiting from a Zero Waste Approach
Zero waste cooking can save you money, improve your diet quality, and help the
environment. You could say it’s a win-win-win! You may be reading this book
because you want to do your part to support a healthy planet, or maybe you want
to waste less and save money, but you may not be aware that a zero waste approach
may also indirectly improve your health. How? Well, there’s money savings in
taking a little bit of time to work on your grocery shopping strategy and use of
leftovers. And when you become more mindful of food storage, meal planning,
and using up fresh fruits and vegetables, you actually end up increasing your consumption of those nutrient-rich foods. Read on, dear reader.
The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) estimated that, in 2018, 63 million
tons of food were wasted, with 40 percent of that coming from households like
yours and mine. Check out apps such as Too Good To Go that help connect people
in need with surplus food supplies that they can purchase at deeply discounted
rates.
Wasting food isn’t just an environmental issue; it’s a social issue, too. It’s estimated that about 10 percent of U.S. households are food insecure at some time
during the year. And hunger and undernourishment throughout the world continue to be a major concern.
Feeding America is an organization that works to reduce food waste and hunger
by matching excess food from national food and grocery manufacturers, retailers,
government agencies, shippers, packers and growers, and other organizations,
with the food banks that need it most. Many agricultural organizations donate
milk, meat, and eggs to local food banks and community organizations as well. To
get involved, check with your local food bank or go to www.feedingamerica.org/
take-action.
14 PART 1 Adopting a Food Waste Strategy
Saving green while going green
Sure, you want to save the earth, but don’t forget that creating a zero waste
kitchen is also going to save you money. All that food waste adds up to more than
$160 billion each year (retail and consumer waste). Some estimate that this
equates to about $1,500 a year per household. Whew! That’s lot of missed meal
creations.
Just think about all the fun experiences you could buy with the money you’re
going to save on your zero waste journey. Or maybe you can donate some of that
money to a worthy charity of your choice.
One way to start working on this right away is to designate a “food scrap bowl” to
keep in your refrigerator. This bowl or container can hold things that you normally might throw away (old bananas, carrot tops, bruised fruit, dried-out tomatoes). After a few days, check out what you have and head to Part 3, where you’ll
find recipes that are especially versatile for cooking with bits and scraps.
Consider using a community-supported agriculture (CSA) system to purchase
seasonal produce from local farmers. The way this works is locally grown produce
is shipped to your door weekly, which can save you money on your food bill and
saves gas and transportation. You could even split it with a friend or neighbor.
Another great way to save money is by buying “ugly” or imperfect produce. Your
local grocer may have a reduced-price shelf. There are several companies that
funnel less-than-perfect produce from processors to sell directly to consumers at
discounts, too. Keep in mind that farmers and food manufacturers are also always
working toward reducing food waste. For instance, a bruised apple doesn’t get
bagged, but it goes into the apple juice or applesauce line at the packaging plant.
Find more ideas in Chapter 6.
Enjoying better nutrition and health
Using a CSA may also inspire you to enjoy a wider variety of food, but so can simply adopting a zero waste kitchen strategy. Fruits and vegetables are often the
items that get forgotten in the refrigerator. Sure, you had big intentions for them
when you put them into your grocery cart, but then, oops, a few too many days
go by.
When you adopt a better shopping strategy, you’ll soon find you’re getting more
creative and seeking out more recipes to use up the food and produce items you
have. In the end, that’s a win for nutrition — and the planet!